pw_function/docs.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_function:

===========
pw_function
===========
The ``pw_function`` module provides a standard, general-purpose API for
wrapping callable objects. ``pw_function`` is similar in spirit and API to
``std::function``, but doesn't allocate, and uses several tricks to prevent
code bloat.

--------
Overview
--------

Basic usage
===========
``pw_function`` defines the :cpp:type:`pw::Function` class. A ``Function`` is a
move-only callable wrapper constructable from any callable object. Functions
are templated on the signature of the callable they store.

Functions implement the call operator --- invoking the object will forward to
the stored callable.

.. code-block:: c++

   int Add(int a, int b) { return a + b; }

   // Construct a Function object from a function pointer.
   pw::Function<int(int, int)> add_function(Add);

   // Invoke the function object.
   int result = add_function(3, 5);
   EXPECT_EQ(result, 8);

   // Construct a function from a lambda.
   pw::Function<int(int)> negate([](int value) { return -value; });
   EXPECT_EQ(negate(27), -27);

Functions are nullable. Invoking a null function triggers a runtime assert.

.. code-block:: c++

   // A function initialized without a callable is implicitly null.
   pw::Function<void()> null_function;

   // Null functions may also be explicitly created or set.
   pw::Function<void()> explicit_null_function(nullptr);

   pw::Function<void()> function([]() {});  // Valid (non-null) function.
   function = nullptr;  // Set to null, clearing the stored callable.

   // Functions are comparable to nullptr.
   if (function != nullptr) {
     function();
   }

:cpp:type:`pw::Function`'s default constructor is ``constexpr``, so
default-constructed functions may be used in classes with ``constexpr``
constructors and in ``constinit`` expressions.

.. code-block:: c++

   class MyClass {
    public:
     // Default construction of a pw::Function is constexpr.
     constexpr MyClass() { ... }

     pw::Function<void(int)> my_function;
   };

   // pw::Function and classes that use it may be constant initialized.
   constinit MyClass instance;

Storage
=======
By default, a ``Function`` stores its callable inline within the object. The
inline storage size defaults to the size of two pointers, but is configurable
through the build system. The size of a ``Function`` object is equivalent to its
inline storage size.

The :cpp:type:`pw::InlineFunction` alias is similar to :cpp:type:`pw::Function`,
but is always inlined. That is, even if dynamic allocation is enabled for
:cpp:type:`pw::Function`, :cpp:type:`pw::InlineFunction` will fail to compile if
the callable is larger than the inline storage size.

Attempting to construct a function from a callable larger than its inline size
is a compile-time error unless dynamic allocation is enabled.

.. admonition:: Inline storage size

   The default inline size of two pointers is sufficient to store most common
   callable objects, including function pointers, simple non-capturing and
   capturing lambdas, and lightweight custom classes.

.. code-block:: c++

   // The lambda is moved into the function's internal storage.
   pw::Function<int(int, int)> subtract([](int a, int b) { return a - b; });

   // Functions can be also be constructed from custom classes that implement
   // operator(). This particular object is large (8 ints of space).
   class MyCallable {
    public:
     int operator()(int value);

    private:
     int data_[8];
   };

   // Compiler error: sizeof(MyCallable) exceeds function's inline storage size.
   pw::Function<int(int)> function((MyCallable()));

.. admonition:: Dynamic allocation

   When ``PW_FUNCTION_ENABLE_DYNAMIC_ALLOCATION`` is enabled, a ``Function``
   will use dynamic allocation to store callables that exceed the inline size.
   An Allocator can be optionally supplied as a template argument. When dynamic
   allocation is enabled but a compile-time check for the inlining is still
   required ``pw::InlineFunction`` can be used.

.. warning::

   If ``PW_FUNCTION_ENABLE_DYNAMIC_ALLOCATION`` is enabled then attempts to cast
   from `:cpp:type:`pw::InlineFunction` to a regular :cpp:type:`pw::Function`
   will **ALWAYS** allocate memory.

---------
API usage
---------

Reference
=========
.. doxygentypedef:: pw::Function
.. doxygentypedef:: pw::InlineFunction
.. doxygentypedef:: pw::Callback
.. doxygentypedef:: pw::InlineCallback
.. doxygenfunction:: pw::bind_member

``pw::Function`` as a function parameter
========================================
When implementing an API which takes a callback, a ``Function`` can be used in
place of a function pointer or equivalent callable.

.. code-block:: c++

   // Before:
   void DoTheThing(int arg, void (*callback)(int result));

   // After. Note that it is possible to have parameter names within the function
   // signature template for clarity.
   void DoTheThing(int arg, const pw::Function<void(int result)>& callback);

:cpp:type:`pw::Function` is movable, but not copyable, so APIs must accept
:cpp:type:`pw::Function` objects either by const reference (``const
pw::Function<void()>&``) or rvalue reference (``const pw::Function<void()>&&``).
If the :cpp:type:`pw::Function` simply needs to be called, it should be passed
by const reference. If the :cpp:type:`pw::Function` needs to be stored, it
should be passed as an rvalue reference and moved into a
:cpp:type:`pw::Function` variable as appropriate.

.. code-block:: c++

   // This function calls a pw::Function but doesn't store it, so it takes a
   // const reference.
   void CallTheCallback(const pw::Function<void(int)>& callback) {
     callback(123);
   }

   // This function move-assigns a pw::Function to another variable, so it takes
   // an rvalue reference.
   void StoreTheCallback(pw::Function<void(int)>&& callback) {
     stored_callback_ = std::move(callback);
   }

.. admonition:: Rules of thumb for passing a :cpp:type:`pw::Function` to a function

   * **Pass by value**: Never.
     This results in unnecessary :cpp:type:`pw::Function` instances and move
     operations.

   * **Pass by const reference** (``const pw::Function&``): When the
     :cpp:type:`pw::Function` is only invoked.

     When a :cpp:type:`pw::Function` is called or inspected, but not moved, take
     a const reference to avoid copies and support temporaries.

   * **Pass by rvalue reference** (``pw::Function&&``): When the
     :cpp:type:`pw::Function` is moved.

     When the function takes ownership of the :cpp:type:`pw::Function` object,
     always use an rvalue reference (``pw::Function<void()>&&``) instead of a
     mutable lvalue reference (``pw::Function<void()>&``). An rvalue reference
     forces the caller to ``std::move`` when passing a preexisting
     :cpp:type:`pw::Function` variable, which makes the transfer of ownership
     explicit. It is possible to move-assign from an lvalue reference, but this
     fails to make it obvious to the caller that the object is no longer valid.

   * **Pass by non-const reference** (``pw::Function&``): Rarely, when modifying
     a variable.

     Non-const references are only necessary when modifying an existing
     :cpp:type:`pw::Function` variable. Use an rvalue reference instead if the
     :cpp:type:`pw::Function` is moved into another variable.

Calling functions that use ``pw::Function``
===========================================
A :cpp:type:`pw::Function` can be implicitly constructed from any callback
object. When calling an API that takes a :cpp:type:`pw::Function`, simply pass
the callable object.  There is no need to create an intermediate
:cpp:type:`pw::Function` object.

.. code-block:: c++

   // Implicitly creates a pw::Function from a capturing lambda and calls it.
   CallTheCallback([this](int result) { result_ = result; });

   // Implicitly creates a pw::Function from a capturing lambda and stores it.
   StoreTheCallback([this](int result) { result_ = result; });

When working with an existing :cpp:type:`pw::Function` variable, the variable
can be passed directly to functions that take a const reference. If the function
takes ownership of the :cpp:type:`pw::Function`, move the
:cpp:type:`pw::Function` variable at the call site.

.. code-block:: c++

   // Accepts the pw::Function by const reference.
   CallTheCallback(my_function_);

   // Takes ownership of the pw::Function.
   void StoreTheCallback(std::move(my_function));

``pw::Callback`` for one-shot functions
=======================================
:cpp:type:`pw::Callback` is a specialization of :cpp:type:`pw::Function` that
can only be called once. After a :cpp:type:`pw::Callback` is called, the target
function is destroyed. A :cpp:type:`pw::Callback` in the "already called" state
has the same state as a :cpp:type:`pw::Callback` that has been assigned to
nullptr.

Invoking ``pw::Function`` from a C-style API
============================================
.. _trampoline layers: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trampoline_(computing)

One use case for invoking ``pw_function`` from a C-style API is to automate
the generation of `trampoline layers`_.

.. doxygenfile:: pw_function/pointer.h
   :sections: detaileddescription

.. doxygenfunction:: GetFunctionPointer()
.. doxygenfunction:: GetFunctionPointer(const FunctionType&)
.. doxygenfunction:: GetFunctionPointerContextFirst()
.. doxygenfunction:: GetFunctionPointerContextFirst(const FunctionType&)

----------
ScopeGuard
----------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::ScopeGuard
   :members:

------------
Size reports
------------

Function class
==============
The following size report compares an API using a :cpp:type:`pw::Function` to a
traditional function pointer.

.. include:: function_size

Callable sizes
==============
The table below demonstrates typical sizes of various callable types, which can
be used as a reference when sizing external buffers for ``Function`` objects.

.. include:: callable_size

------
Design
------
:cpp:type:`pw::Function` is an alias of
`fit::function_impl <https://cs.opensource.google/fuchsia/fuchsia/+/main:sdk/lib/fit/include/lib/fit/function.h>`_.

:cpp:type:`pw::Callback` is an alias of
`fit::callback_impl <https://cs.opensource.google/fuchsia/fuchsia/+/main:sdk/lib/fit/include/lib/fit/function.h>`_.

.. _module-pw_function-non-literal:

Why pw::Function is not a literal
=================================
The default constructor for ``pw::Function`` is ``constexpr`` but
``pw::Function`` is not a literal type. Instances can be declared ``constinit``
but can't be used in ``constexpr`` contexts. There are a few reasons for this:

* ``pw::Function`` supports wrapping any callable type, and the wrapped type
  might not be a literal type.
* ``pw::Function`` stores inline callables in a bytes array, which is not
  ``constexpr``-friendly.
* ``pw::Function`` optionally uses dynamic allocation, which doesn't work in
  ``constexpr`` contexts (at least before C++20).

------
Zephyr
------
To enable ``pw_function` for Zephyr add ``CONFIG_PIGWEED_FUNCTION=y`` to the
project's configuration.

Commit message:

pw_function: Add configurable Allocator default
Also, fix some inaccurate information about inline sizing.

Change-Id: I983ad456cdff3ca10294ceecd030f332baa7231c
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/171130
Reviewed-by: Armando Montanez <amontanez@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Leonard Zgrablic <lzgrablic@google.com>

pw_function/docs.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_function:

===========
pw_function
===========
The ``pw_function`` module provides a standard, general-purpose API for
wrapping callable objects. ``pw_function`` is similar in spirit and API to
``std::function``, but doesn't allocate, and uses several tricks to prevent
code bloat.

--------
Overview
--------

Basic usage
===========
``pw_function`` defines the :cpp:type:`pw::Function` class. A ``Function`` is a
move-only callable wrapper constructable from any callable object. Functions
are templated on the signature of the callable they store.

Functions implement the call operator --- invoking the object will forward to
the stored callable.

.. code-block:: c++

   int Add(int a, int b) { return a + b; }

   // Construct a Function object from a function pointer.
   pw::Function<int(int, int)> add_function(Add);

   // Invoke the function object.
   int result = add_function(3, 5);
   EXPECT_EQ(result, 8);

   // Construct a function from a lambda.
   pw::Function<int(int)> negate([](int value) { return -value; });
   EXPECT_EQ(negate(27), -27);

Functions are nullable. Invoking a null function triggers a runtime assert.

.. code-block:: c++

   // A function initialized without a callable is implicitly null.
   pw::Function<void()> null_function;

   // Null functions may also be explicitly created or set.
   pw::Function<void()> explicit_null_function(nullptr);

   pw::Function<void()> function([]() {});  // Valid (non-null) function.
   function = nullptr;  // Set to null, clearing the stored callable.

   // Functions are comparable to nullptr.
   if (function != nullptr) {
     function();
   }

:cpp:type:`pw::Function`'s default constructor is ``constexpr``, so
default-constructed functions may be used in classes with ``constexpr``
constructors and in ``constinit`` expressions.

.. code-block:: c++

   class MyClass {
    public:
     // Default construction of a pw::Function is constexpr.
     constexpr MyClass() { ... }

     pw::Function<void(int)> my_function;
   };

   // pw::Function and classes that use it may be constant initialized.
   constinit MyClass instance;

Storage
=======
By default, a ``Function`` stores its callable inline within the object. The
inline storage size defaults to the size of one pointer, but is configurable
through the build system.

The :cpp:type:`pw::InlineFunction` alias is similar to :cpp:type:`pw::Function`,
but is always inlined. That is, even if dynamic allocation is enabled for
:cpp:type:`pw::Function`, :cpp:type:`pw::InlineFunction` will fail to compile if
the callable is larger than the inline storage size.

Attempting to construct a function from a callable larger than its inline size
is a compile-time error unless dynamic allocation is enabled.

.. admonition:: Inline storage size

   The default inline size of one pointer is sufficient to store most common
   callable objects, including function pointers, simple non-capturing and
   capturing lambdas, and lightweight custom classes.

.. code-block:: c++

   // The lambda is moved into the function's internal storage.
   pw::Function<int(int, int)> subtract([](int a, int b) { return a - b; });

   // Functions can be also be constructed from custom classes that implement
   // operator(). This particular object is large (8 ints of space).
   class MyCallable {
    public:
     int operator()(int value);

    private:
     int data_[8];
   };

   // Compiler error: sizeof(MyCallable) exceeds function's inline storage size.
   pw::Function<int(int)> function((MyCallable()));

.. admonition:: Dynamic allocation

   When ``PW_FUNCTION_ENABLE_DYNAMIC_ALLOCATION`` is enabled, a ``Function``
   will use dynamic allocation to store callables that exceed the inline size.
   An Allocator type can be optionally supplied as a template argument. The
   default Allocator type can also be changed by overriding
   ``PW_FUNCTION_DEFAULT_ALLOCATOR_TYPE`` (the ``value_type`` of the Allocator
   is irrelevant, since it must support rebinding). When dynamic allocation is
   enabled but a compile-time check for the inlining is still required
   ``pw::InlineFunction`` can be used.

.. warning::

   If ``PW_FUNCTION_ENABLE_DYNAMIC_ALLOCATION`` is enabled then attempts to cast
   from `:cpp:type:`pw::InlineFunction` to a regular :cpp:type:`pw::Function`
   will **ALWAYS** allocate memory.

---------
API usage
---------

Reference
=========
.. doxygentypedef:: pw::Function
.. doxygentypedef:: pw::InlineFunction
.. doxygentypedef:: pw::Callback
.. doxygentypedef:: pw::InlineCallback
.. doxygenfunction:: pw::bind_member

``pw::Function`` as a function parameter
========================================
When implementing an API which takes a callback, a ``Function`` can be used in
place of a function pointer or equivalent callable.

.. code-block:: c++

   // Before:
   void DoTheThing(int arg, void (*callback)(int result));

   // After. Note that it is possible to have parameter names within the function
   // signature template for clarity.
   void DoTheThing(int arg, const pw::Function<void(int result)>& callback);

:cpp:type:`pw::Function` is movable, but not copyable, so APIs must accept
:cpp:type:`pw::Function` objects either by const reference (``const
pw::Function<void()>&``) or rvalue reference (``const pw::Function<void()>&&``).
If the :cpp:type:`pw::Function` simply needs to be called, it should be passed
by const reference. If the :cpp:type:`pw::Function` needs to be stored, it
should be passed as an rvalue reference and moved into a
:cpp:type:`pw::Function` variable as appropriate.

.. code-block:: c++

   // This function calls a pw::Function but doesn't store it, so it takes a
   // const reference.
   void CallTheCallback(const pw::Function<void(int)>& callback) {
     callback(123);
   }

   // This function move-assigns a pw::Function to another variable, so it takes
   // an rvalue reference.
   void StoreTheCallback(pw::Function<void(int)>&& callback) {
     stored_callback_ = std::move(callback);
   }

.. admonition:: Rules of thumb for passing a :cpp:type:`pw::Function` to a function

   * **Pass by value**: Never.
     This results in unnecessary :cpp:type:`pw::Function` instances and move
     operations.

   * **Pass by const reference** (``const pw::Function&``): When the
     :cpp:type:`pw::Function` is only invoked.

     When a :cpp:type:`pw::Function` is called or inspected, but not moved, take
     a const reference to avoid copies and support temporaries.

   * **Pass by rvalue reference** (``pw::Function&&``): When the
     :cpp:type:`pw::Function` is moved.

     When the function takes ownership of the :cpp:type:`pw::Function` object,
     always use an rvalue reference (``pw::Function<void()>&&``) instead of a
     mutable lvalue reference (``pw::Function<void()>&``). An rvalue reference
     forces the caller to ``std::move`` when passing a preexisting
     :cpp:type:`pw::Function` variable, which makes the transfer of ownership
     explicit. It is possible to move-assign from an lvalue reference, but this
     fails to make it obvious to the caller that the object is no longer valid.

   * **Pass by non-const reference** (``pw::Function&``): Rarely, when modifying
     a variable.

     Non-const references are only necessary when modifying an existing
     :cpp:type:`pw::Function` variable. Use an rvalue reference instead if the
     :cpp:type:`pw::Function` is moved into another variable.

Calling functions that use ``pw::Function``
===========================================
A :cpp:type:`pw::Function` can be implicitly constructed from any callback
object. When calling an API that takes a :cpp:type:`pw::Function`, simply pass
the callable object.  There is no need to create an intermediate
:cpp:type:`pw::Function` object.

.. code-block:: c++

   // Implicitly creates a pw::Function from a capturing lambda and calls it.
   CallTheCallback([this](int result) { result_ = result; });

   // Implicitly creates a pw::Function from a capturing lambda and stores it.
   StoreTheCallback([this](int result) { result_ = result; });

When working with an existing :cpp:type:`pw::Function` variable, the variable
can be passed directly to functions that take a const reference. If the function
takes ownership of the :cpp:type:`pw::Function`, move the
:cpp:type:`pw::Function` variable at the call site.

.. code-block:: c++

   // Accepts the pw::Function by const reference.
   CallTheCallback(my_function_);

   // Takes ownership of the pw::Function.
   void StoreTheCallback(std::move(my_function));

``pw::Callback`` for one-shot functions
=======================================
:cpp:type:`pw::Callback` is a specialization of :cpp:type:`pw::Function` that
can only be called once. After a :cpp:type:`pw::Callback` is called, the target
function is destroyed. A :cpp:type:`pw::Callback` in the "already called" state
has the same state as a :cpp:type:`pw::Callback` that has been assigned to
nullptr.

Invoking ``pw::Function`` from a C-style API
============================================
.. _trampoline layers: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trampoline_(computing)

One use case for invoking ``pw_function`` from a C-style API is to automate
the generation of `trampoline layers`_.

.. doxygenfile:: pw_function/pointer.h
   :sections: detaileddescription

.. doxygenfunction:: GetFunctionPointer()
.. doxygenfunction:: GetFunctionPointer(const FunctionType&)
.. doxygenfunction:: GetFunctionPointerContextFirst()
.. doxygenfunction:: GetFunctionPointerContextFirst(const FunctionType&)

----------
ScopeGuard
----------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::ScopeGuard
   :members:

------------
Size reports
------------

Function class
==============
The following size report compares an API using a :cpp:type:`pw::Function` to a
traditional function pointer.

.. include:: function_size

Callable sizes
==============
The table below demonstrates typical sizes of various callable types, which can
be used as a reference when sizing external buffers for ``Function`` objects.

.. include:: callable_size

------
Design
------
:cpp:type:`pw::Function` is an alias of
`fit::function_impl <https://cs.opensource.google/fuchsia/fuchsia/+/main:sdk/lib/fit/include/lib/fit/function.h>`_.

:cpp:type:`pw::Callback` is an alias of
`fit::callback_impl <https://cs.opensource.google/fuchsia/fuchsia/+/main:sdk/lib/fit/include/lib/fit/function.h>`_.

.. _module-pw_function-non-literal:

Why pw::Function is not a literal
=================================
The default constructor for ``pw::Function`` is ``constexpr`` but
``pw::Function`` is not a literal type. Instances can be declared ``constinit``
but can't be used in ``constexpr`` contexts. There are a few reasons for this:

* ``pw::Function`` supports wrapping any callable type, and the wrapped type
  might not be a literal type.
* ``pw::Function`` stores inline callables in a bytes array, which is not
  ``constexpr``-friendly.
* ``pw::Function`` optionally uses dynamic allocation, which doesn't work in
  ``constexpr`` contexts (at least before C++20).

------
Zephyr
------
To enable ``pw_function` for Zephyr add ``CONFIG_PIGWEED_FUNCTION=y`` to the
project's configuration.
