pw_protobuf_compiler/docs.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_protobuf_compiler:

====================
pw_protobuf_compiler
====================
The Protobuf compiler module provides build system integration and wrapper
scripts for generating source code for Protobuf definitions.

--------------------
Protobuf compilation
--------------------

Generator support
=================
Protobuf code generation is currently supported for the following generators:

+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Generator   | Code           | Notes                                         |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| pw_protobuf | ``pwpb``       | Compiles using ``pw_protobuf``.               |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| pw_protobuf | ``pwpb_rpc``   | Compiles pw_rpc service and client code for   |
| RPC         |                | ``pw_protobuf``.                              |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Nanopb      | ``nanopb``     | Compiles using Nanopb. The build argument     |
|             |                | ``dir_pw_third_party_nanopb`` must be set to  |
|             |                | point to a local nanopb installation.         |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Nanopb RPC  | ``nanopb_rpc`` | Compiles pw_rpc service and client code for   |
|             |                | nanopb. Requires a nanopb installation.       |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Raw RPC     | ``raw_rpc``    | Compiles raw binary pw_rpc service code.      |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Go          | ``go``         | Compiles using the standard Go protobuf       |
|             |                | plugin with gRPC service support.             |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Python      | ``python``     | Compiles using the standard Python protobuf   |
|             |                | plugin, creating a ``pw_python_package``.     |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Typescript  | ``typescript`` | Compilation is supported in Bazel via         |
|             |                | @rules_proto_grpc. ProtoCollection provides   |
|             |                | convience methods for proto descriptors.      |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+

GN template
===========
This module provides a ``pw_proto_library`` GN template that defines a
collection of protobuf files that should be compiled together. The template
creates a sub-target for each supported generator, named
``<target_name>.<generator>``. These sub-targets generate their respective
protobuf code, and expose it to the build system appropriately (e.g. a
``pw_source_set`` for C/C++).

For example, given the following target:

.. code-block::

   pw_proto_library("test_protos") {
     sources = [ "my_test_protos/test.proto" ]
   }

``test_protos.pwpb`` compiles code for pw_protobuf, and ``test_protos.nanopb``
compiles using Nanopb (if it's installed).

Protobuf code is only generated when a generator sub-target is listed as a
dependency of another GN target.

GN permits using abbreviated labels when the target name matches the directory
name (e.g. ``//foo`` for ``//foo:foo``). For consistency with this, the
sub-targets for each generator are aliased to the directory when the target name
is the same. For example, these two labels are equivalent:

.. code-block::

   //path/to/my_protos:my_protos.pwpb
   //path/to/my_protos:pwpb

``pw_python_package`` subtargets are also available on the ``python`` subtarget:

.. code-block::

   //path/to/my_protos:my_protos.python.lint
   //path/to/my_protos:python.lint

**Supported Codegen**

GN supports the following compiled proto libraries via the specified
sub-targets generated by a ``pw_proto_library``.

* ``${target_name}.pwpb`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf code
* ``${target_name}.pwpb_rpc`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf pw_rpc code
* ``${target_name}.nanopb`` - Generated C++ nanopb code (requires Nanopb)
* ``${target_name}.nanopb_rpc`` - Generated C++ Nanopb pw_rpc code (requires
  Nanopb)
* ``${target_name}.raw_rpc`` - Generated C++ raw pw_rpc code (no protobuf
  library)
* ``${target_name}.go`` - Generated GO protobuf libraries
* ``${target_name}.python`` - Generated Python protobuf libraries

**Arguments**

* ``sources``: List of input .proto files.
* ``deps``: List of other pw_proto_library dependencies.
* ``other_deps``: List of other non-proto dependencies.
* ``inputs``: Other files on which the protos depend (e.g. nanopb ``.options``
  files).
* ``prefix``: A prefix to add to the source protos prior to compilation. For
  example, a source called ``"foo.proto"`` with ``prefix = "nested"`` will be
  compiled with protoc as ``"nested/foo.proto"``.
* ``strip_prefix``: Remove this prefix from the source protos. All source and
  input files must be nested under this path.
* ``python_package``: Label of Python package to which to add the proto modules.
  The .python subtarget will redirect to this package.
* ``enabled_targets``: List of sub-targets to enable (see Supported Codegen),
  e.g. ``["pwpb", "raw_rpc"]``. By default, all sub-targets are enabled. The
  enabled sub-targets are built only as requested by the build system, but it
  may be necessary to explicitly disable an unused sub-target if it conflicts
  with another target in the same package. (For example, ``nanopb`` codegen can
  conflict with the default C++ codegen provided by ``protoc``.)
  TODO: b/235132083 - Remove this argument once we've removed the file-name
  conflict between nanopb and protoc code generators.

**Example**

.. code-block::

   import("$dir_pw_protobuf_compiler/proto.gni")

   pw_proto_library("my_protos") {
     sources = [
       "my_protos/foo.proto",
       "my_protos/bar.proto",
     ]
   }

   pw_proto_library("my_other_protos") {
     sources = [ "some/other/path/baz.proto" ]  # imports foo.proto

     # This removes the "some/other/path" prefix from the proto files.
     strip_prefix = "some/other/path"

     # This adds the "my_other_protos/" prefix to the proto files.
     prefix = "my_other_protos"

     # Proto libraries depend on other proto libraries directly.
     deps = [ ":my_protos" ]
   }

   source_set("my_cc_code") {
     sources = [
       "foo.cc",
       "bar.cc",
       "baz.cc",
     ]

     # When depending on protos in a source_set, specify the generator suffix.
     deps = [ ":my_other_protos.pwpb" ]
   }

From C++, ``baz.proto`` included as follows:

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "my_other_protos/baz.pwpb.h"

From Python, ``baz.proto`` is imported as follows:

.. code-block:: python

   from my_other_protos import baz_pb2

Proto file structure
--------------------
Protobuf source files must be nested under another directory when they are
compiled. This ensures that they can be packaged properly in Python.

Using ``prefix`` and ``strip_prefix`` together allows remapping proto files to
a completely different path. This can be useful when working with protos defined
in external libraries. For example, consider this proto library:

.. code-block::

   pw_proto_library("external_protos") {
     sources = [
       "//other/external/some_library/src/protos/alpha.proto",
       "//other/external/some_library/src/protos/beta.proto,
       "//other/external/some_library/src/protos/internal/gamma.proto",
     ]
     strip_prefix = "//other/external/some_library/src/protos"
     prefix = "some_library"
   }

These protos will be compiled by protoc as if they were in this file structure:

.. code-block::

   some_library/
   ├── alpha.proto
   ├── beta.proto
   └── internal
       └── gamma.proto

.. _module-pw_protobuf_compiler-add-to-python-package:

Adding Python proto modules to an existing package
--------------------------------------------------
By default, generated Python proto modules are organized into their own Python
package. These proto modules can instead be added to an existing Python package
declared with ``pw_python_package``. This is done by setting the
``python_package`` argument on the ``pw_proto_library`` and the
``proto_library`` argument on the ``pw_python_package``.

For example, the protos declared in ``my_protos`` will be nested in the Python
package declared by ``my_package``.

.. code-block::

   pw_proto_library("my_protos") {
     sources = [ "hello.proto ]
     prefix = "foo"
     python_package = ":my_package"
   }

   pw_python_pacakge("my_package") {
     generate_setup = {
       metadata = {
         name = "foo"
         version = "1.0"
       }
     }

     sources = [ "foo/cool_module.py" ]
     proto_library = ":my_protos"
   }

The ``hello_pb2.py`` proto module can be used alongside other files in the
``foo`` package.

.. code-block:: python

   from foo import cool_module, hello_pb2

Working with externally defined protos
--------------------------------------
``pw_proto_library`` targets may be used to build ``.proto`` sources from
existing projects. In these cases, it may be necessary to supply the
``strip_prefix`` argument, which specifies the protobuf include path to use for
``protoc``. If only a single external protobuf is being compiled, the
``python_module_as_package`` option can be used to override the requirement that
the protobuf be nested under a directory. This option generates a Python package
with the same name as the proto file, so that the generated proto can be
imported as if it were a standalone Python module.

For example, the ``pw_proto_library`` target for Nanopb sets
``python_module_as_package`` to ``nanopb_pb2``.

.. code-block::

   pw_proto_library("proto") {
     strip_prefix = "$dir_pw_third_party_nanopb/generator/proto"
     sources = [ "$dir_pw_third_party_nanopb/generator/proto/nanopb.proto" ]
     python_module_as_package = "nanopb_pb2"
   }

In Python, this makes ``nanopb.proto`` available as ``import nanopb_pb2`` via
the ``nanopb_pb2`` Python package. In C++, ``nanopb.proto`` is accessed as
``#include "nanopb.pwpb.h"``.

The ``python_module_as_package`` feature should only be used when absolutely
necessary --- for example, to support proto files that include
``import "nanopb.proto"``.

Specifying a custom ``protoc``
------------------------------
If your build needs to use a custom build of ``protoc`` rather than the one
supplied by pigweed it can be specified by setting
``pw_protobuf_compiler_PROTOC_TARGET`` to a GN target that produces a ``protoc``
executable and ``pw_protobuf_compiler_PROTOC_BINARY`` to the path, relative to
``root_build_dir``, of the ``protoc`` executable.

For all ``protoc`` invocations, the build will add a dependency on that target
and will invoke that executable.

CMake
=====
CMake provides a ``pw_proto_library`` function with similar features as the
GN template. The CMake build only supports building firmware code, so
``pw_proto_library`` does not generate a Python package.

**Arguments**

* ``NAME``: the base name of the libraries to create
* ``SOURCES``: .proto source files
* ``DEPS``: dependencies on other ``pw_proto_library`` targets
* ``PREFIX``: prefix add to the proto files
* ``STRIP_PREFIX``: prefix to remove from the proto files
* ``INPUTS``: files to include along with the .proto files (such as Nanopb
  .options files)

**Example**

.. code-block:: cmake

   include($ENV{PW_ROOT}/pw_build/pigweed.cmake)
   include($ENV{PW_ROOT}/pw_protobuf_compiler/proto.cmake)

   pw_proto_library(my_module.my_protos
     SOURCES
       my_protos/foo.proto
       my_protos/bar.proto
   )

   pw_proto_library(my_module.my_protos
     SOURCES
       my_protos/foo.proto
       my_protos/bar.proto
   )

   pw_proto_library(my_module.my_other_protos
     SOURCES
       some/other/path/baz.proto  # imports foo.proto

     # This removes the "some/other/path" prefix from the proto files.
     STRIP_PREFIX
       some/other/path

     # This adds the "my_other_protos/" prefix to the proto files.
     PREFIX
       my_other_protos

     # Proto libraries depend on other proto libraries directly.
     DEPS
       my_module.my_protos
   )

   add_library(my_module.my_cc_code
       foo.cc
       bar.cc
       baz.cc
   )

   # When depending on protos in a source_set, specify the generator suffix.
   target_link_libraries(my_module.my_cc_code PUBLIC
     my_module.my_other_protos.pwpb
   )

These proto files are accessed in C++ the same as in the GN build:

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "my_other_protos/baz.pwpb.h"

**Supported Codegen**

CMake supports the following compiled proto libraries via the specified
sub-targets generated by a ``pw_proto_library``.

* ``${NAME}.pwpb`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf code
* ``${NAME}.pwpb_rpc`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf pw_rpc code
* ``${NAME}.nanopb`` - Generated C++ nanopb code (requires Nanopb)
* ``${NAME}.nanopb_rpc`` - Generated C++ Nanopb pw_rpc code (requires Nanopb)
* ``${NAME}.raw_rpc`` - Generated C++ raw pw_rpc code (no protobuf library)

Bazel
=====
In Bazel we provide a set rules with similar features to the GN templates:

* ``pwpb_proto_library`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf code
* ``pwpb_rpc_proto_library`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf pw_rpc code
* ``raw_rpc_proto_library`` - Generated C++ raw pw_rpc code (no protobuf library)
* ``nanopb_proto_library`` - Generated C++ nanopb code
* ``nanopb_rpc_proto_library`` - Generated C++ Nanopb pw_rpc code

These rules build the corresponding firmware code; there are no rules for
generating Python libraries. The Bazel rules differ slightly compared to the GN
build to be more in line with what would be considered idiomatic in Bazel.

To use Pigweeds Protobuf rules you must first pull in the required dependencies
into your Bazel WORKSPACE file. e.g.

.. code-block:: python

   # WORKSPACE ...
   load("@pigweed//pw_protobuf_compiler:deps.bzl", "pw_protobuf_dependencies")
   pw_protobuf_dependencies()

Bazel uses a different set of rules to manage proto files than it does to
compile them. e.g.

.. code-block:: python

   # BUILD ...
   load("@rules_proto//proto:defs.bzl", "proto_library")
   load("@pigweed//pw_protobuf_compiler:pw_proto_library.bzl",
     "nanopb_proto_library",
     "nanopb_rpc_proto_library",
     "pwpb_proto_library",
     "raw_rpc_proto_library",
   )

   # Manages proto sources and dependencies.
   proto_library(
     name = "my_proto",
     srcs = [
       "my_protos/foo.proto",
       "my_protos/bar.proto",
     ]
   )

   # Compiles dependent protos to C++.
   pwpb_proto_library(
     name = "my_proto_pwpb",
     deps = [":my_proto"],
   )

   nanopb_proto_library(
     name = "my_proto_nanopb",
     deps = [":my_proto"],
   )

   raw_rpc_proto_library(
     name = "my_proto_raw_rpc",
     deps = [":my_proto"],
   )

   nanopb_rpc_proto_library(
     name = "my_proto_nanopb_rpc",
     nanopb_proto_library_deps = [":my_proto_nanopb"],
     deps = [":my_proto"],
   )

   # Library that depends on only pw_protobuf generated proto targets.
   cc_library(
     name = "my_proto_only_lib",
     srcs = ["my/proto_only.cc"],
     deps = [":my_proto_pwpb"],
   )

   # Library that depends on only Nanopb generated proto targets.
   cc_library(
     name = "my_nanopb_only_lib",
     srcs = ["my/nanopb_only.cc"],
     deps = [":my_proto_nanopb"],
   )

   # Library that depends on pw_protobuf and pw_rpc/raw.
   cc_library(
     name = "my_raw_rpc_lib",
     srcs = ["my/raw_rpc.cc"],
     deps = [
       ":my_proto_pwpb",
       ":my_proto_raw_rpc",
     ],
   )
   cc_library(
     name = "my_nanopb_rpc_lib",
     srcs = ["my/proto_only.cc"],
     deps = [
       ":my_proto_nanopb_rpc",
     ],
   )

From ``my/lib.cc`` you can now include the generated headers.
e.g.

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "my_protos/bar.pwpb.h"
   // and/or RPC headers
   #include "my_protos/bar.raw_rpc.pb.h
   // or
   #include "my_protos/bar.nanopb_rpc.pb.h"


Why isn't there one rule to generate all the code?
--------------------------------------------------
There is! Like in GN, it's called ``pw_proto_library``, and has subtargets
corresponding to the different codegen flavors. However, *we recommend against
using this target*. It is deprecated, and will be removed in the future.

The ``pw_proto_library`` target has a number of disadvantages:

#. As a general bazel style rule, macros should produce exactly one target for
   external use, named according to the invocation's name argument. ``BUILD``
   files are easier to follow when the name specified in the macro call
   actually matches the name of the generated target. This is not possible if a
   single macro is generating multiple targets, as ``pw_proto_library`` does.
#. If you depend directly on the ``pw_proto_library``, rather than the
   appropriate subtargets, you will build code you don't actually use. You may
   even fetch dependencies you don't need, like nanopb.
#. The subtargets you don't depend on are still added to your BUILD files by
   the ``pw_proto_library`` macro, and bazel will attempt to build them when
   you run ``bazel build //...``. This may cause build breakages, and has
   forced us to implement `awkward workarounds
   <https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/96980>`_.

----------------------
Python proto libraries
----------------------
``pw_protobuf_compiler`` includes utilties for working with protocol buffers
in Python. The tools facilitate using protos from their package names
(``my.pkg.Message()``) rather than their generated module names
(``proto_source_file_pb2.Message()``).

``python_protos`` module
========================
.. automodule:: pw_protobuf_compiler.python_protos
  :members: proto_repr, Library

Commit message:

many: Unrecommendify
Remove "we recommend" wording from various Pigweed modules.

Change-Id: Id9a705f84985354f2b3f36ad803558c4b6dab8bf
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/194852
Pigweed-Auto-Submit: Armando Montanez <amontanez@google.com>
Reviewed-by: Kayce Basques <kayce@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Auto-Submit <auto-submit@pigweed-service-accounts.iam.gserviceaccount.com>

pw_protobuf_compiler/docs.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_protobuf_compiler:

====================
pw_protobuf_compiler
====================
The Protobuf compiler module provides build system integration and wrapper
scripts for generating source code for Protobuf definitions.

--------------------
Protobuf compilation
--------------------

Generator support
=================
Protobuf code generation is currently supported for the following generators:

+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Generator   | Code           | Notes                                         |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| pw_protobuf | ``pwpb``       | Compiles using ``pw_protobuf``.               |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| pw_protobuf | ``pwpb_rpc``   | Compiles pw_rpc service and client code for   |
| RPC         |                | ``pw_protobuf``.                              |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Nanopb      | ``nanopb``     | Compiles using Nanopb. The build argument     |
|             |                | ``dir_pw_third_party_nanopb`` must be set to  |
|             |                | point to a local nanopb installation.         |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Nanopb RPC  | ``nanopb_rpc`` | Compiles pw_rpc service and client code for   |
|             |                | nanopb. Requires a nanopb installation.       |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Raw RPC     | ``raw_rpc``    | Compiles raw binary pw_rpc service code.      |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Go          | ``go``         | Compiles using the standard Go protobuf       |
|             |                | plugin with gRPC service support.             |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Python      | ``python``     | Compiles using the standard Python protobuf   |
|             |                | plugin, creating a ``pw_python_package``.     |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Typescript  | ``typescript`` | Compilation is supported in Bazel via         |
|             |                | @rules_proto_grpc. ProtoCollection provides   |
|             |                | convience methods for proto descriptors.      |
+-------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+

GN template
===========
This module provides a ``pw_proto_library`` GN template that defines a
collection of protobuf files that should be compiled together. The template
creates a sub-target for each supported generator, named
``<target_name>.<generator>``. These sub-targets generate their respective
protobuf code, and expose it to the build system appropriately (e.g. a
``pw_source_set`` for C/C++).

For example, given the following target:

.. code-block::

   pw_proto_library("test_protos") {
     sources = [ "my_test_protos/test.proto" ]
   }

``test_protos.pwpb`` compiles code for pw_protobuf, and ``test_protos.nanopb``
compiles using Nanopb (if it's installed).

Protobuf code is only generated when a generator sub-target is listed as a
dependency of another GN target.

GN permits using abbreviated labels when the target name matches the directory
name (e.g. ``//foo`` for ``//foo:foo``). For consistency with this, the
sub-targets for each generator are aliased to the directory when the target name
is the same. For example, these two labels are equivalent:

.. code-block::

   //path/to/my_protos:my_protos.pwpb
   //path/to/my_protos:pwpb

``pw_python_package`` subtargets are also available on the ``python`` subtarget:

.. code-block::

   //path/to/my_protos:my_protos.python.lint
   //path/to/my_protos:python.lint

**Supported Codegen**

GN supports the following compiled proto libraries via the specified
sub-targets generated by a ``pw_proto_library``.

* ``${target_name}.pwpb`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf code
* ``${target_name}.pwpb_rpc`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf pw_rpc code
* ``${target_name}.nanopb`` - Generated C++ nanopb code (requires Nanopb)
* ``${target_name}.nanopb_rpc`` - Generated C++ Nanopb pw_rpc code (requires
  Nanopb)
* ``${target_name}.raw_rpc`` - Generated C++ raw pw_rpc code (no protobuf
  library)
* ``${target_name}.go`` - Generated GO protobuf libraries
* ``${target_name}.python`` - Generated Python protobuf libraries

**Arguments**

* ``sources``: List of input .proto files.
* ``deps``: List of other pw_proto_library dependencies.
* ``other_deps``: List of other non-proto dependencies.
* ``inputs``: Other files on which the protos depend (e.g. nanopb ``.options``
  files).
* ``prefix``: A prefix to add to the source protos prior to compilation. For
  example, a source called ``"foo.proto"`` with ``prefix = "nested"`` will be
  compiled with protoc as ``"nested/foo.proto"``.
* ``strip_prefix``: Remove this prefix from the source protos. All source and
  input files must be nested under this path.
* ``python_package``: Label of Python package to which to add the proto modules.
  The .python subtarget will redirect to this package.
* ``enabled_targets``: List of sub-targets to enable (see Supported Codegen),
  e.g. ``["pwpb", "raw_rpc"]``. By default, all sub-targets are enabled. The
  enabled sub-targets are built only as requested by the build system, but it
  may be necessary to explicitly disable an unused sub-target if it conflicts
  with another target in the same package. (For example, ``nanopb`` codegen can
  conflict with the default C++ codegen provided by ``protoc``.)
  TODO: b/235132083 - Remove this argument once we've removed the file-name
  conflict between nanopb and protoc code generators.

**Example**

.. code-block::

   import("$dir_pw_protobuf_compiler/proto.gni")

   pw_proto_library("my_protos") {
     sources = [
       "my_protos/foo.proto",
       "my_protos/bar.proto",
     ]
   }

   pw_proto_library("my_other_protos") {
     sources = [ "some/other/path/baz.proto" ]  # imports foo.proto

     # This removes the "some/other/path" prefix from the proto files.
     strip_prefix = "some/other/path"

     # This adds the "my_other_protos/" prefix to the proto files.
     prefix = "my_other_protos"

     # Proto libraries depend on other proto libraries directly.
     deps = [ ":my_protos" ]
   }

   source_set("my_cc_code") {
     sources = [
       "foo.cc",
       "bar.cc",
       "baz.cc",
     ]

     # When depending on protos in a source_set, specify the generator suffix.
     deps = [ ":my_other_protos.pwpb" ]
   }

From C++, ``baz.proto`` included as follows:

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "my_other_protos/baz.pwpb.h"

From Python, ``baz.proto`` is imported as follows:

.. code-block:: python

   from my_other_protos import baz_pb2

Proto file structure
--------------------
Protobuf source files must be nested under another directory when they are
compiled. This ensures that they can be packaged properly in Python.

Using ``prefix`` and ``strip_prefix`` together allows remapping proto files to
a completely different path. This can be useful when working with protos defined
in external libraries. For example, consider this proto library:

.. code-block::

   pw_proto_library("external_protos") {
     sources = [
       "//other/external/some_library/src/protos/alpha.proto",
       "//other/external/some_library/src/protos/beta.proto,
       "//other/external/some_library/src/protos/internal/gamma.proto",
     ]
     strip_prefix = "//other/external/some_library/src/protos"
     prefix = "some_library"
   }

These protos will be compiled by protoc as if they were in this file structure:

.. code-block::

   some_library/
   ├── alpha.proto
   ├── beta.proto
   └── internal
       └── gamma.proto

.. _module-pw_protobuf_compiler-add-to-python-package:

Adding Python proto modules to an existing package
--------------------------------------------------
By default, generated Python proto modules are organized into their own Python
package. These proto modules can instead be added to an existing Python package
declared with ``pw_python_package``. This is done by setting the
``python_package`` argument on the ``pw_proto_library`` and the
``proto_library`` argument on the ``pw_python_package``.

For example, the protos declared in ``my_protos`` will be nested in the Python
package declared by ``my_package``.

.. code-block::

   pw_proto_library("my_protos") {
     sources = [ "hello.proto ]
     prefix = "foo"
     python_package = ":my_package"
   }

   pw_python_pacakge("my_package") {
     generate_setup = {
       metadata = {
         name = "foo"
         version = "1.0"
       }
     }

     sources = [ "foo/cool_module.py" ]
     proto_library = ":my_protos"
   }

The ``hello_pb2.py`` proto module can be used alongside other files in the
``foo`` package.

.. code-block:: python

   from foo import cool_module, hello_pb2

Working with externally defined protos
--------------------------------------
``pw_proto_library`` targets may be used to build ``.proto`` sources from
existing projects. In these cases, it may be necessary to supply the
``strip_prefix`` argument, which specifies the protobuf include path to use for
``protoc``. If only a single external protobuf is being compiled, the
``python_module_as_package`` option can be used to override the requirement that
the protobuf be nested under a directory. This option generates a Python package
with the same name as the proto file, so that the generated proto can be
imported as if it were a standalone Python module.

For example, the ``pw_proto_library`` target for Nanopb sets
``python_module_as_package`` to ``nanopb_pb2``.

.. code-block::

   pw_proto_library("proto") {
     strip_prefix = "$dir_pw_third_party_nanopb/generator/proto"
     sources = [ "$dir_pw_third_party_nanopb/generator/proto/nanopb.proto" ]
     python_module_as_package = "nanopb_pb2"
   }

In Python, this makes ``nanopb.proto`` available as ``import nanopb_pb2`` via
the ``nanopb_pb2`` Python package. In C++, ``nanopb.proto`` is accessed as
``#include "nanopb.pwpb.h"``.

The ``python_module_as_package`` feature should only be used when absolutely
necessary --- for example, to support proto files that include
``import "nanopb.proto"``.

Specifying a custom ``protoc``
------------------------------
If your build needs to use a custom build of ``protoc`` rather than the one
supplied by pigweed it can be specified by setting
``pw_protobuf_compiler_PROTOC_TARGET`` to a GN target that produces a ``protoc``
executable and ``pw_protobuf_compiler_PROTOC_BINARY`` to the path, relative to
``root_build_dir``, of the ``protoc`` executable.

For all ``protoc`` invocations, the build will add a dependency on that target
and will invoke that executable.

CMake
=====
CMake provides a ``pw_proto_library`` function with similar features as the
GN template. The CMake build only supports building firmware code, so
``pw_proto_library`` does not generate a Python package.

**Arguments**

* ``NAME``: the base name of the libraries to create
* ``SOURCES``: .proto source files
* ``DEPS``: dependencies on other ``pw_proto_library`` targets
* ``PREFIX``: prefix add to the proto files
* ``STRIP_PREFIX``: prefix to remove from the proto files
* ``INPUTS``: files to include along with the .proto files (such as Nanopb
  .options files)

**Example**

.. code-block:: cmake

   include($ENV{PW_ROOT}/pw_build/pigweed.cmake)
   include($ENV{PW_ROOT}/pw_protobuf_compiler/proto.cmake)

   pw_proto_library(my_module.my_protos
     SOURCES
       my_protos/foo.proto
       my_protos/bar.proto
   )

   pw_proto_library(my_module.my_protos
     SOURCES
       my_protos/foo.proto
       my_protos/bar.proto
   )

   pw_proto_library(my_module.my_other_protos
     SOURCES
       some/other/path/baz.proto  # imports foo.proto

     # This removes the "some/other/path" prefix from the proto files.
     STRIP_PREFIX
       some/other/path

     # This adds the "my_other_protos/" prefix to the proto files.
     PREFIX
       my_other_protos

     # Proto libraries depend on other proto libraries directly.
     DEPS
       my_module.my_protos
   )

   add_library(my_module.my_cc_code
       foo.cc
       bar.cc
       baz.cc
   )

   # When depending on protos in a source_set, specify the generator suffix.
   target_link_libraries(my_module.my_cc_code PUBLIC
     my_module.my_other_protos.pwpb
   )

These proto files are accessed in C++ the same as in the GN build:

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "my_other_protos/baz.pwpb.h"

**Supported Codegen**

CMake supports the following compiled proto libraries via the specified
sub-targets generated by a ``pw_proto_library``.

* ``${NAME}.pwpb`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf code
* ``${NAME}.pwpb_rpc`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf pw_rpc code
* ``${NAME}.nanopb`` - Generated C++ nanopb code (requires Nanopb)
* ``${NAME}.nanopb_rpc`` - Generated C++ Nanopb pw_rpc code (requires Nanopb)
* ``${NAME}.raw_rpc`` - Generated C++ raw pw_rpc code (no protobuf library)

Bazel
=====
In Bazel we provide a set rules with similar features to the GN templates:

* ``pwpb_proto_library`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf code
* ``pwpb_rpc_proto_library`` - Generated C++ pw_protobuf pw_rpc code
* ``raw_rpc_proto_library`` - Generated C++ raw pw_rpc code (no protobuf library)
* ``nanopb_proto_library`` - Generated C++ nanopb code
* ``nanopb_rpc_proto_library`` - Generated C++ Nanopb pw_rpc code

These rules build the corresponding firmware code; there are no rules for
generating Python libraries. The Bazel rules differ slightly compared to the GN
build to be more in line with what would be considered idiomatic in Bazel.

To use Pigweeds Protobuf rules you must first pull in the required dependencies
into your Bazel WORKSPACE file. e.g.

.. code-block:: python

   # WORKSPACE ...
   load("@pigweed//pw_protobuf_compiler:deps.bzl", "pw_protobuf_dependencies")
   pw_protobuf_dependencies()

Bazel uses a different set of rules to manage proto files than it does to
compile them. e.g.

.. code-block:: python

   # BUILD ...
   load("@rules_proto//proto:defs.bzl", "proto_library")
   load("@pigweed//pw_protobuf_compiler:pw_proto_library.bzl",
     "nanopb_proto_library",
     "nanopb_rpc_proto_library",
     "pwpb_proto_library",
     "raw_rpc_proto_library",
   )

   # Manages proto sources and dependencies.
   proto_library(
     name = "my_proto",
     srcs = [
       "my_protos/foo.proto",
       "my_protos/bar.proto",
     ]
   )

   # Compiles dependent protos to C++.
   pwpb_proto_library(
     name = "my_proto_pwpb",
     deps = [":my_proto"],
   )

   nanopb_proto_library(
     name = "my_proto_nanopb",
     deps = [":my_proto"],
   )

   raw_rpc_proto_library(
     name = "my_proto_raw_rpc",
     deps = [":my_proto"],
   )

   nanopb_rpc_proto_library(
     name = "my_proto_nanopb_rpc",
     nanopb_proto_library_deps = [":my_proto_nanopb"],
     deps = [":my_proto"],
   )

   # Library that depends on only pw_protobuf generated proto targets.
   cc_library(
     name = "my_proto_only_lib",
     srcs = ["my/proto_only.cc"],
     deps = [":my_proto_pwpb"],
   )

   # Library that depends on only Nanopb generated proto targets.
   cc_library(
     name = "my_nanopb_only_lib",
     srcs = ["my/nanopb_only.cc"],
     deps = [":my_proto_nanopb"],
   )

   # Library that depends on pw_protobuf and pw_rpc/raw.
   cc_library(
     name = "my_raw_rpc_lib",
     srcs = ["my/raw_rpc.cc"],
     deps = [
       ":my_proto_pwpb",
       ":my_proto_raw_rpc",
     ],
   )
   cc_library(
     name = "my_nanopb_rpc_lib",
     srcs = ["my/proto_only.cc"],
     deps = [
       ":my_proto_nanopb_rpc",
     ],
   )

From ``my/lib.cc`` you can now include the generated headers.
e.g.

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "my_protos/bar.pwpb.h"
   // and/or RPC headers
   #include "my_protos/bar.raw_rpc.pb.h
   // or
   #include "my_protos/bar.nanopb_rpc.pb.h"


Why isn't there one rule to generate all the code?
--------------------------------------------------
There is! Like in GN, it's called ``pw_proto_library``, and has subtargets
corresponding to the different codegen flavors. However, new code **should not**
use this. It is deprecated, and will be removed in the future.

The ``pw_proto_library`` target has a number of disadvantages:

#. As a general bazel style rule, macros should produce exactly one target for
   external use, named according to the invocation's name argument. ``BUILD``
   files are easier to follow when the name specified in the macro call
   actually matches the name of the generated target. This is not possible if a
   single macro is generating multiple targets, as ``pw_proto_library`` does.
#. If you depend directly on the ``pw_proto_library``, rather than the
   appropriate subtargets, you will build code you don't actually use. You may
   even fetch dependencies you don't need, like nanopb.
#. The subtargets you don't depend on are still added to your BUILD files by
   the ``pw_proto_library`` macro, and bazel will attempt to build them when
   you run ``bazel build //...``. This may cause build breakages, and has
   forced us to implement `awkward workarounds
   <https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/96980>`_.

----------------------
Python proto libraries
----------------------
``pw_protobuf_compiler`` includes utilties for working with protocol buffers
in Python. The tools facilitate using protos from their package names
(``my.pkg.Message()``) rather than their generated module names
(``proto_source_file_pb2.Message()``).

``python_protos`` module
========================
.. automodule:: pw_protobuf_compiler.python_protos
  :members: proto_repr, Library
