docs/contributing/docs/website.rst, before:

.. _docs-contrib-docs-website:

===========
pigweed.dev
===========
Guides and resources for people who want to make changes to Pigweed's
documentation website, ``pigweed.dev``.

.. _docs-contrib-docs-website-redirects:

----------------
Create redirects
----------------
.. _sphinx-reredirects: https://pypi.org/project/sphinx-reredirects/

``pigweed.dev`` supports client-side HTML redirects. The redirects are powered
by `sphinx-reredirects`_.

To create a redirect:

#. Open ``//docs/conf.py``.

.. _Usage: https://documatt.com/sphinx-reredirects/usage.html

#. Add your redirect to the ``redirects`` dict. See the
   `Usage`_ section from the ``sphinx-reredirects`` docs.

   * The redirect should be relative to the source path (i.e. the path that
     needs to get redirected).

   * The target path (i.e. the destination path that the source path should
     redirect to) should include the full HTML filename to ensure that the
     redirects also work during local development. In other words, prefer
     ``./example/docs.html`` over ``./example/`` because the latter assumes
     the existence of a server that redirects ``./example/`` to
     ``./example/docs.html``.

For each URL that should be redirected, ``sphinx-reredirects`` auto-generates
HTML like this:

.. code-block:: html

   <html>
     <head>
       <meta http-equiv="refresh" content="0; url=pw_sys_io_rp2040/">
     </head>
   </html>

.. _meta refresh and its HTTP equivalent: https://developers.google.com/search/docs/crawling-indexing/301-redirects#metarefresh

.. note::

   Server-side redirects are the most robust solution, but client-side
   redirects are good enough for our needs:

   * Client-side redirects are supported in all browsers and should work
     therefore work for all real ``pigweed.dev`` readers.

   * Client-side redirects were much easier and faster to implement.

   * Client-side redirects can be stored alongside the rest of the
     ``pigweed.dev`` source code.

   * Google Search interprets the kind of client side redirects that we use
     as permanent redirects, which is the behavior we want. See
     `meta refresh and its HTTP equivalent`_. The type of client-side redirect
     we used is called a "instant ``meta refresh`` redirect" in that guide.

Commit message:

docs: Organize the documentation style guides
Change-Id: I0f246a9c027fcded4121ba3662c5fe3a178ae487
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/201116
Reviewed-by: Chad Norvell <chadnorvell@google.com>
Presubmit-Verified: CQ Bot Account <pigweed-scoped@luci-project-accounts.iam.gserviceaccount.com>
Commit-Queue: Kayce Basques <kayce@google.com>

docs/contributing/docs/website.rst, after:

.. _docs-contrib-docs-website:

===========
pigweed.dev
===========
How to make frontend and backend website changes to ``pigweed.dev``,
Pigweed's main documentationw website, and how to change the functionality
of Sphinx, the website generator that powers ``pigweed.dev``.

.. _docs-contrib-docs-website-redirects:

----------------
Create redirects
----------------
.. _sphinx-reredirects: https://pypi.org/project/sphinx-reredirects/

``pigweed.dev`` supports client-side HTML redirects. The redirects are powered
by `sphinx-reredirects`_.

To create a redirect:

#. Open ``//docs/conf.py``.

.. _Usage: https://documatt.com/sphinx-reredirects/usage.html

#. Add your redirect to the ``redirects`` dict. See the
   `Usage`_ section from the ``sphinx-reredirects`` docs.

   * The redirect should be relative to the source path (i.e. the path that
     needs to get redirected).

   * The target path (i.e. the destination path that the source path should
     redirect to) should include the full HTML filename to ensure that the
     redirects also work during local development. In other words, prefer
     ``./example/docs.html`` over ``./example/`` because the latter assumes
     the existence of a server that redirects ``./example/`` to
     ``./example/docs.html``.

For each URL that should be redirected, ``sphinx-reredirects`` auto-generates
HTML like this:

.. code-block:: html

   <html>
     <head>
       <meta http-equiv="refresh" content="0; url=pw_sys_io_rp2040/">
     </head>
   </html>

.. _meta refresh and its HTTP equivalent: https://developers.google.com/search/docs/crawling-indexing/301-redirects#metarefresh

.. note::

   Server-side redirects are the most robust solution, but client-side
   redirects are good enough for our needs:

   * Client-side redirects are supported in all browsers and should work
     therefore work for all real ``pigweed.dev`` readers.

   * Client-side redirects were much easier and faster to implement.

   * Client-side redirects can be stored alongside the rest of the
     ``pigweed.dev`` source code.

   * Google Search interprets the kind of client side redirects that we use
     as permanent redirects, which is the behavior we want. See
     `meta refresh and its HTTP equivalent`_. The type of client-side redirect
     we used is called a "instant ``meta refresh`` redirect" in that guide.
