pw_i2c_rp2040/docs.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_i2c_rp2040:

-------------
pw_i2c_rp2040
-------------

``pw_i2c_rp2040`` implements the ``pw_i2c`` interface using the
Raspberry Pi Pico SDK.

The implementation is based on the i2c driver in pico_sdk. I2C transfers use
the blocking driver API which uses busy waiting under the hood.

Usage
=====
.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "pw_i2c_rp2040/initiator.h"

   #include "hardware/i2c.h"

   constexpr pw::i2c::Rp2040Initiator::Config ki2cConfig{
     .clock_frequency = 400'000,
     .sda_pin = 8,
     .scl_pin = 9,
   };

    pw::i2c::Rp2040Initiator i2c_bus(ki2cConfig, i2c0);
    # This will call:
    #   gpio_set_function(8, GPIO_FUNC_I2C);
    #   gpio_set_function(9, GPIO_FUNC_I2C);
    i2c_bus.Enable();

Implementation Callouts
=======================

The ``Enable()`` function will call `gpio_set_function
<https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/pico-sdk/hardware.html#rpipc56748afaf477c99958b>`_
from the pico_sdk.

Under the hood this implementation uses these pico_sdk functions which only
allow specifying timeouts in microseconds:

- `i2c_read_blocking_until <https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/pico-sdk/hardware.html#rpip9cd3e6e1aeea56af6388>`_
- `i2c_read_timeout_us <https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/pico-sdk/hardware.html#rpip0102e3f420f091f30b00>`_
- `i2c_write_blocking_until <https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/pico-sdk/hardware.html#rpip03d01a63251da3cc0588>`_
- `i2c_write_timeout_us <https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/pico-sdk/hardware.html#rpip6ca2b36048b95c5e0b07>`_

One additional microsecond is added to each timeout value to ensure reads and
writes wait at least the full duration. Ideally a single clock tick would be
added but that is not currently possible with the pico_sdk APIs.

Commit message:

pw_i2c: Revamp docs
Change-Id: I2d4be8a74fb1334ef8020d78ce9b30da2e64daec
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/196330
Reviewed-by: Erik Gilling <konkers@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Kayce Basques <kayce@google.com>

pw_i2c_rp2040/docs.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_i2c_rp2040:

-------------
pw_i2c_rp2040
-------------
.. pigweed-module::
   :name: pw_i2c_rp2040

.. pw_i2c_rp2040-example-start

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "pw_i2c_rp2040/initiator.h"

   #include "hardware/i2c.h"

   constexpr pw::i2c::Rp2040Initiator::Config ki2cConfig{
     .clock_frequency = 400'000,
     .sda_pin = 8,
     .scl_pin = 9,
   };

    pw::i2c::Rp2040Initiator i2c_bus(ki2cConfig, i2c0);
    // Calls these Pico SDK functions:
    // * gpio_set_function(8, GPIO_FUNC_I2C)
    // * gpio_set_function(9, GPIO_FUNC_I2C)
    i2c_bus.Enable();

.. pw_i2c_rp2040-example-end

``pw_i2c_rp2040`` implements the :ref:`module-pw_i2c` interface using the
Raspberry Pi Pico SDK.

The implementation is based on the I2C driver in the Pico SDK. I2C transfers
use the blocking driver API which uses busy waiting under the hood.

Implementation notes
====================
The ``Enable()`` function calls `gpio_set_function
<https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/pico-sdk/hardware.html#rpipc56748afaf477c99958b>`_
from the Pico SDK.

Under the hood this implementation uses the following Pico SDK functions which only
allow specifying timeouts in microseconds:

- `i2c_read_blocking_until <https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/pico-sdk/hardware.html#rpip9cd3e6e1aeea56af6388>`_
- `i2c_read_timeout_us <https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/pico-sdk/hardware.html#rpip0102e3f420f091f30b00>`_
- `i2c_write_blocking_until <https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/pico-sdk/hardware.html#rpip03d01a63251da3cc0588>`_
- `i2c_write_timeout_us <https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/pico-sdk/hardware.html#rpip6ca2b36048b95c5e0b07>`_

One additional microsecond is added to each timeout value to ensure reads and
writes wait at least the full duration. Ideally a single clock tick would be
added but that is not currently possible with the Pico SDK APIs.
