pw_build/docs.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_build:

--------
pw_build
--------
Pigweed's modules aim to be easily integratable into both new and existing
embedded projects. To that goal, the ``pw_build`` module provides support for
multiple build systems. Our personal favorite is `GN`_/`Ninja`_, which is used
by upstream developers for its speed and flexibility. `CMake`_ and `Bazel`_
build files are also provided by all modules, allowing Pigweed to be added to a
project with minimal effort.

.. _GN: https://gn.googlesource.com/gn/
.. _Ninja: https://ninja-build.org/
.. _CMake: https://cmake.org/
.. _Bazel: https://bazel.build/

Beyond just compiling code, Pigweed’s GN build system can also:

* Generate HTML documentation, via our Sphinx integration (with ``pw_docgen``)
* Display memory usage report cards (with ``pw_bloat``)
* Incrementally run unit tests after code changes (with ``pw_target_runner``)
* And more!

These are only supported in the GN build, so we recommend using it if possible.

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 1

   gn
   cmake
   bazel

Commit message:

many: Unrecommendify
Remove "we recommend" wording from various Pigweed modules.

Change-Id: Id9a705f84985354f2b3f36ad803558c4b6dab8bf
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/194852
Pigweed-Auto-Submit: Armando Montanez <amontanez@google.com>
Reviewed-by: Kayce Basques <kayce@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Auto-Submit <auto-submit@pigweed-service-accounts.iam.gserviceaccount.com>

pw_build/docs.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_build:

--------
pw_build
--------
Pigweed's modules aim to be easily integratable into both new and existing
embedded projects. To that goal, the ``pw_build`` module provides support for
multiple build systems. Our personal favorite is `GN`_/`Ninja`_, which is used
by upstream developers for its speed and flexibility. `CMake`_ and `Bazel`_
build files are also provided by all modules, allowing Pigweed to be added to a
project with minimal effort.

.. _GN: https://gn.googlesource.com/gn/
.. _Ninja: https://ninja-build.org/
.. _CMake: https://cmake.org/
.. _Bazel: https://bazel.build/

Beyond just compiling code, Pigweed’s GN build system can also:

* Generate HTML documentation, via our Sphinx integration (with ``pw_docgen``)
* Display memory usage report cards (with ``pw_bloat``)
* Incrementally run unit tests after code changes (with ``pw_target_runner``)
* And more!

These are only supported in the GN build, but work is being done to bring
these to Pigweed's Bazel build integration.

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 1

   gn
   cmake
   bazel
