pw_log_zephyr/docs.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_log_zephyr:

================
pw_log_zephyr
================

--------
Overview
--------
This interrupt backend implements the ``pw_log`` facade. To enable, set
``CONFIG_PIGWEED_LOG=y``. After that, logging can be controlled via the standard
`Kconfig options <https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/reference/logging/index.html#global-kconfig-options>`_.
All logs made through `PW_LOG_*` are logged to the Zephyr logging module
``pigweed``.

Setting the log level
---------------------
In order to remain compatible with existing Pigweed code, the logging backend
respects ``PW_LOG_LEVEL``. If set, the backend will translate the Pigweed log
levels to their closest Zephyr counterparts:

+---------------------------+-------------------+
| Pigweed                   | Zephyr            |
+===========================+===================+
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_DEBUG``    | ``LOG_LEVEL_DBG`` |
+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_INFO``     | ``LOG_LEVEL_INF`` |
+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_WARN``     | ``LOG_LEVEL_WRN`` |
+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_ERROR``    | ``LOG_LEVEL_ERR`` |
|                           |                   |
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_CRITICAL`` |                   |
|                           |                   |
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_FATAL``    |                   |
+---------------------------+-------------------+

Alternatively, it is also possible to set the Zephyr logging level directly via
``CONFIG_PIGWEED_LOG_LEVEL``.

Commit message:

pw_log: Enable Zephyr with pw_log_tokenized
Had to replace PIGWEED_LOG with a choice but we can't just deprecate
it and select PIGWEED_LOG_ZEPHYR since you can't use the 'select'
statement on a 'choice' in Kconfig.

Change-Id: I18d8007e30d104ccff11f1df0c47ed61324f78a7
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/132740
Reviewed-by: Keir Mierle <keir@google.com>
Pigweed-Auto-Submit: Yuval Peress <peress@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Auto-Submit <auto-submit@pigweed.google.com.iam.gserviceaccount.com>

pw_log_zephyr/docs.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_log_zephyr:

=============
pw_log_zephyr
=============

--------
Overview
--------
This interrupt backend implements the ``pw_log`` facade. Currently, two
separate Pigweed backends are implemented. One that uses the plain Zephyr
logging framework and routes Pigweed's logs to Zephyr. While another maps
the Zephyr logging macros to Pigweed's tokenized logging.

Using Zephyr logging
--------------------
To enable, set ``CONFIG_PIGWEED_LOG_ZEPHYR=y``. After that, logging can be
controlled via the standard `Kconfig options`_. All logs made through
`PW_LOG_*` are logged to the Zephyr logging module ``pigweed``. In this
model, the Zephyr logging is set as ``pw_log``'s backend.

Using Pigweed tokenized logging
-------------------------------
Using the pigweed logging can be done by enabling
``CONFIG_PIGWEED_LOG_TOKENIZED=y``. At that point ``pw_log_tokenized`` is set
as the backedn for ``pw_log`` and all Zephyr logs are routed to Pigweed's
logging facade. This means that any logging statements made in Zephyr itself
are also tokenized.

Setting the log level
---------------------
In order to remain compatible with existing Pigweed code, the logging backend
respects ``PW_LOG_LEVEL``. If set, the backend will translate the Pigweed log
levels to their closest Zephyr counterparts:

+---------------------------+-------------------+
| Pigweed                   | Zephyr            |
+===========================+===================+
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_DEBUG``    | ``LOG_LEVEL_DBG`` |
+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_INFO``     | ``LOG_LEVEL_INF`` |
+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_WARN``     | ``LOG_LEVEL_WRN`` |
+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_ERROR``    | ``LOG_LEVEL_ERR`` |
|                           |                   |
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_CRITICAL`` |                   |
|                           |                   |
| ``PW_LOG_LEVEL_FATAL``    |                   |
+---------------------------+-------------------+

Alternatively, it is also possible to set the Zephyr logging level directly via
``CONFIG_PIGWEED_LOG_LEVEL``.

.. _`Kconfig options`: https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/reference/logging/index.html#global-kconfig-options
