pw_symbolizer/docs.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_symbolizer:

=============
pw_symbolizer
=============

.. warning::
  This module is under construction and may not be ready for use.

pw_symbolizer provides python-based tooling for symbolizing addresses emitted by
on-device firmware.

-----
Usage
-----
Symbolizer
==========
The ``Symbolizer`` abstract base class is an interface for translating addresses
to human-readable source locations. Different architectures and operating
systems can require vastly different implementations, so this interface is
provided to allow Pigweed tooling to symbolize addresses without requiring
Pigweed to provide explicit support for all possible implementations.

``Symbolizer`` Also provides a helper function for producing nicely formatted
stack trace style dumps.

.. code-block:: py

  import pw_symbolizer

  symbolizer = pw_symbolizer.LlvmSymbolizer(Path('device_fw.elf'))
  print(symbolizer.dump_stack_trace(backtrace_addresses))

Which produces output like this:

.. code-block:: none

  Stack Trace (most recent call first):
     1: at device::system::logging_thread_context (0x08004BE0)
        in threads.cc:0
     2: at device::system::logging_thread (0x0800B508)
        in ??:?
     3: at device::system::logging_thread_context (0x08004CB8)
        in threads.cc:0
     4: at device::system::logging_thread (0x0800B3C0)
        in ??:?
     5: at device::system::logging_thread (0x0800B508)
        in ??:?
     6: at (0x0800BAF7)
        in ??:?
     7: at common::log::LoggingThread::Run() (0x0800BAD1)
        in out/common/log/logging_thread.cc:26
     8: at pw::thread::threadx::Context::ThreadEntryPoint(unsigned long) (0x0800539D)
        in out/pigweed/pw_thread_threadx/thread.cc:41
     9: at device::system::logging_thread_context (0x08004CB8)
        in threads.cc:0
    10: at device::system::logging_thread_context (0x08004BE0)
        in threads.cc:0

FakeSymbolizer
==============
The ``FakeSymbolizer`` is utility class that implements the ``Symbolizer``
interface with a fixed database of address to ``Symbol`` mappings. This is
useful for testing, or as a no-op ``Symbolizer``.

.. code-block:: py

  import pw_symbolizer

  known_symbols = (
      pw_symbolizer.Symbol(0x0800A200, 'foo()', 'src/foo.c', 41),
      pw_symbolizer.Symbol(0x08000004, 'boot_entry()', 'src/vector_table.c', 5),
  )
  symbolizer = pw_symbolizer.FakeSymbolizer(known_symbols)
  sym = symbolizer.symbolize(0x0800A200)
  print(f'This fake symbolizer knows about: {sym}')

LlvmSymbolizer
==============
The ``LlvmSymbolizer`` is a python layer that wraps ``llvm-symbolizer`` to
produce symbols from provided addresses. This module will only work if
``llvm-symbolizer`` is available on the system ``PATH``.

.. code-block:: py

  import pw_symbolizer

  symbolizer = pw_symbolizer.LlvmSymbolizer(Path('device_fw.elf'))
  sym = symbolizer.symbolize(0x2000ac21)
  print(f'You have a bug here: {sym}')

Commit message:

pw_symbolizer: LlvmSymbolizer tool improvement
This CL changes the LlvmSymbolizer class to better support using this
library in a long lived server process.

- Add an llvm-symbolizer path argument when not in the Pigweed
  environment.
- Add `close` method to handle deterministically closing the
  llvm-symbolizer subprocess.

Change-Id: I42938a7697b06b7f43b33509c6ba521dd62bd1f3
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/168863
Presubmit-Verified: CQ Bot Account <pigweed-scoped@luci-project-accounts.iam.gserviceaccount.com>
Reviewed-by: Armando Montanez <amontanez@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Arun Sharma <arsharma@google.com>

pw_symbolizer/docs.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_symbolizer:

=============
pw_symbolizer
=============

.. warning::
  This module is under construction and may not be ready for use.

pw_symbolizer provides python-based tooling for symbolizing addresses emitted by
on-device firmware.

-----
Usage
-----
Symbolizer
==========
The ``Symbolizer`` abstract base class is an interface for translating addresses
to human-readable source locations. Different architectures and operating
systems can require vastly different implementations, so this interface is
provided to allow Pigweed tooling to symbolize addresses without requiring
Pigweed to provide explicit support for all possible implementations.

``Symbolizer`` Also provides a helper function for producing nicely formatted
stack trace style dumps.

.. code-block:: py

  import pw_symbolizer

  symbolizer = pw_symbolizer.LlvmSymbolizer(Path('device_fw.elf'))
  print(symbolizer.dump_stack_trace(backtrace_addresses))

Which produces output like this:

.. code-block:: none

  Stack Trace (most recent call first):
     1: at device::system::logging_thread_context (0x08004BE0)
        in threads.cc:0
     2: at device::system::logging_thread (0x0800B508)
        in ??:?
     3: at device::system::logging_thread_context (0x08004CB8)
        in threads.cc:0
     4: at device::system::logging_thread (0x0800B3C0)
        in ??:?
     5: at device::system::logging_thread (0x0800B508)
        in ??:?
     6: at (0x0800BAF7)
        in ??:?
     7: at common::log::LoggingThread::Run() (0x0800BAD1)
        in out/common/log/logging_thread.cc:26
     8: at pw::thread::threadx::Context::ThreadEntryPoint(unsigned long) (0x0800539D)
        in out/pigweed/pw_thread_threadx/thread.cc:41
     9: at device::system::logging_thread_context (0x08004CB8)
        in threads.cc:0
    10: at device::system::logging_thread_context (0x08004BE0)
        in threads.cc:0

FakeSymbolizer
==============
The ``FakeSymbolizer`` is utility class that implements the ``Symbolizer``
interface with a fixed database of address to ``Symbol`` mappings. This is
useful for testing, or as a no-op ``Symbolizer``.

.. code-block:: py

  import pw_symbolizer

  known_symbols = (
      pw_symbolizer.Symbol(0x0800A200, 'foo()', 'src/foo.c', 41),
      pw_symbolizer.Symbol(0x08000004, 'boot_entry()', 'src/vector_table.c', 5),
  )
  symbolizer = pw_symbolizer.FakeSymbolizer(known_symbols)
  sym = symbolizer.symbolize(0x0800A200)
  print(f'This fake symbolizer knows about: {sym}')

LlvmSymbolizer
==============
The ``LlvmSymbolizer`` is a python layer that wraps ``llvm-symbolizer`` to
produce symbols from provided addresses. This module requires either:

* ``llvm-symbolizer`` is available on the system ``PATH``.
* ``llvm_symbolizer_binary`` argument is specified and points to the executable.

This object also defines a ``close`` to ensure the background process is
cleaned up deterministically.

.. code-block:: py

  import pw_symbolizer

  symbolizer = pw_symbolizer.LlvmSymbolizer(Path('device_fw.elf'))
  sym = symbolizer.symbolize(0x2000ac21)
  print(f'You have a bug here: {sym}')
