docs/infra/ci_cq_intro.rst, before:

.. _docs-ci-cq-intro:

===========
CI/CQ Intro
===========

.. _essentials:

----------
Essentials
----------

Submitting CLs
==============
The Gerrit ``Submit`` button is hidden, replaced by the ``Submit to CQ``
button. The ``Submit`` button is still accessible behind the ``...`` button
in the top right corner of the Gerrit UI, but in some cases requires elevated
permissions.

Triggering presubmits
=====================
Presubmits are not automatically run when a patch set is uploaded. Click
``CQ Dry Run`` to trigger them. (You can also use
``git push origin +HEAD:refs/for/main%l=Commit-Queue``).

Presubmit validity duration
===========================
If you don't have recent passing results from a ``CQ Dry Run`` (within 24
hours) then ``Submit to CQ`` will run presubmits. After any newly run
presubmits pass this will submit the change.

User interface
==============
If a presubmit fails you'll get a Gerrit comment with a link to the failing
build. The status of tryjobs (pending, running, failed, passed, etc.) is
shown directly in the Gerrit UI (see :ref:`tryjobs`).

Auto-Submit
===========
If you want your change to be automatically submitted when all requirements
are met (``Code-Review +2``, ``OWNERS``-approval, all comments resolved,
etc.) set the ``Auto-Submit`` label to +1. If submission fails it will be
retried a couple times with backoff and then the auto submit job will give up.


.. _further-details:

---------------
Further Details
---------------

Applying changes in testing
===========================
Changes are always rebased on the most recent commit when tested. If they
fail to rebase the build fails.
``CQ Dry Run`` is the same as voting ``Commit-Queue +1`` label and
``Submit to CQ`` is the same as voting ``Commit-Queue +2``. If you vote both
``Code-Review +2`` and ``Commit-Queue +2`` on somebody's change you are
submitting it for them.

Post-Submit builders
====================
Jobs are run post-submission too and can be seen at
https://ci.chromium.org/p/pigweed (for public projects) and
https://ci.chromium.org/p/pigweed-internal (for internal projects). Builders can
also be viewed from Pigweed's :ref:`builder visualization <docs-builder-viz>`.

Non-``main`` branches
=====================
CQ is enabled for all branches. If you upload to an individual repository
branch X and the manifest or superproject also has a branch X, that branch of
the manifest will be used.

Rollers
=======
Just because a change has been submitted doesn't mean it's live in the
project. Submodules and Android Repo Tool projects often need to be
:ref:`rolled <docs-rollers>` before they're in the most recent checkout of the
project.

Presubmit result
================
The ``Presubmit-Verified`` label is set at the completion of CQ runs. It does
not block submission, but can be used by Copybara to see if CQ has passed.
If it looks incorrect, do another CQ run and it will be updated.

.. _docs-builder-viz:

Builder Visualization
=====================

Pigweed's builder visualization simplifies the process of browsing, viewing, and
triggering builders. The source-of-truth for it is Google-internal, but there's
a public version without the Google-internal bits.

 *  `Builder Viz link for external contributors <https://pigweed.googlesource.com/infra/config/+/main/generated/pigweed/for_review_only/viz/index.md>`_
 *  `Builder Viz link for Googlers <https://pigweed-internal.googlesource.com/infra/config/+/main/generated/pigweed/for_review_only/viz/index.md>`_

.. _tryjobs:

-------
Tryjobs
-------
The colors of tryjobs in the Gerrit UI indicate the status of the tryjob: gray
is pending/running, green is passed, red is failed or cancelled, and purple is
an infra failure.

Some tryjobs are not yet stable and are run as "experimental". These can be
viewed with ``Show Experimental Tryjobs``. Experimental tryjobs run with CQ but
do not block it.

Individual tryjobs can be run additional times using the ``Choose Tryjobs``
dialog. This can also be used to run tryjobs that would not normally run on the
change. Tryjobs ran this way can be used to satisfy CQ requirements, but don't
block CQ.

.. _prod-vs-dev:

Prod vs Dev
===========
Most builders have "prod" and "dev" versions. The "prod" versions block changes
in CQ and may cause emails to be sent out if they fail in CI. The "dev" builders
test new VM images before they go to "prod", so if a "dev" builder is failing
when a "prod" builder is not failing, then the "dev" builder is failing because
of an upcoming VM change, and teams should take time to get the "dev" builder to
pass. For most projects, "dev" builders show up on the far right of console
views in the LUCI UI.

.. _tryjobs-cli:

Tryjobs CLI
===========

``bb`` command
--------------
The ``bb`` command is available in a bootstrapped Pigweed environment and the
environments of many downstream projects. It is also available from
`Chromium's depot tools <https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/tools/depot_tools.git>_`.


Querying tryjobs
----------------
In addition to viewing tryjobs in the Gerrit UI, you can use the ``bb`` command
to query the tryjobs that ran on a change. The command to use is
``bb ls -cl $URL``, but ``$URL`` has two non-obvious requirements:

*  It needs to be a ".googlesource.com" URL and not a Google-internal version of
   that URL.
*  It needs to include the patchset number.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ bb ls -cl https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/sample_project/+/53684/1 | egrep -v '^(Tag|By):'
   http://ci.chromium.org/b/8841234941714219488 SUCCESS   'pigweed/try/sample-project-xref-generator'
   Created on 2021-07-19 at 16:45:32, waited 14.8s, started at 16:45:47, ran for 2m43s, ended at 16:48:30
   CL: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/sample_project/+/53684/1

   http://ci.chromium.org/b/8841234941714219504 INFRA_FAILURE 'pigweed/try/sample-project-renode-test'
   Summary: Infra Failure: Step('run pigweed/pw_unit_test/renode/test.sh') (retcode: None)
   Created on 2021-07-19 at 16:45:32, waited 51.6s, started at 16:46:24, ran for 2m40s, ended at 16:49:04
   CL: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/sample_project/+/53684/1

To exclude non-experimental tryjobs, add ``-t cq_experimental:false`` to the
command.

Manually launching tryjobs
--------------------------
In most cases, individual tryjobs can be launched using
``Choose Additional Tryjobs``. If any relevant tryjobs are not listed here
please file a bug.

The ``bb`` command can also be used to launch tryjobs, which can useful for
tracking down race conditions by launching many copies of a tryjob. Please be
careful using this, especially during working hours in California.

.. code-block:: shell

   URL="https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/sample_project/+/53684/1"
   TRYJOB="pigweed/sample_project.try/sample-project-xref-generator"
   for i in $(seq 1 25); do
     bb add -cl "$URL" "$TRYJOB"
   done

.. _why-didnt-lintformat-catch:

Why didn't lintformat catch this formatting change?
===================================================
Rolls of tools like clang can update the preferred format of clang-format. There
are two possibilities for addressing this. First, the tool roll could be blocked
until formatting passes. This could require coordinating several changes across
many repositories. This is further complicated if the new formatting preferred
by clang-format is not accepted by the previous version. Second, lintformat can
be configured to only run on changed files. This means downstream project
lintformat tryjobs would not be run on Pigweed changes, nor on rolls of Pigweed
into these projects.

The second choice was selected. This means when tools roll lintformat jobs may
start failing in CI, but they only fail in CQ on changes that touch files
currently failing in CI. Teams should watch their build alert email list and
proactively fix lintformat failures when they come.

.. _dependent-changes:

-----------------
Dependent changes
-----------------

.. _creating:

Creating
========
To pull in other changes when testing a change add a ``patches.json`` file to
the root of the repository. An example is below.

.. code-block:: json

   [
     {
       "gerrit_name": "pigweed",
       "number": 123456
     },
     {
       "gerrit_name": "pigweed",
       "number": 654321
     }
   ]

Patches can be uni- or bidirectional and are transitive. The tryjob will parse
this file, and then parse any ``patches.json`` files found in the referenced
changes. If requirements are truly one-way, don't list them as two-way. Only the
Gerrit instance name (the part before "-review") is permitted. The repository
name is not included.

.. admonition:: Note
   :class: warning

   ``patches.json`` cannot be used for changes to *the same repo* on the same
   Gerrit host (`b/230610752 <https://issuetracker.google.com/230610752>`_).
   Just stack these changes instead.

.. _submitting:

Submitting
==========
Pigweed's infrastructure does not support submitting multiple changes together.
The best option is to find a way to have changes not depend on each other and
submit them separately, or to have a one-way requirement instead of codependent
changes, and submit the changes in dependency order, waiting for any necessary
rolls before submitting the next change.

Pigweed-related Gerrit hosts are configured to reject submission of all changes
containing ``patches.json`` files. If the dependency is one-way, then submit the
change without dependencies, wait for it to roll (if necessary), remove
``patches.json`` from the dependent change, and vote ``Commit-Queue +2``.

If the changes are truly codependent—both (or all) changes need each other—then
follow the instructions below.

First, get both changes passing CQ with ``patches.json`` files.

If one of the codependent changes is a submodule and another is the parent
project, update the submodule change to no longer include the ``patches.json``
file. Then directly submit the submodule change, bypassing CQ. This will break
the roller, but not the source tree, so others on your team are unaffected. Once
it's submitted do the following:

.. admonition:: Note
   :class: warning

   Some projects have limitations on submission outside of CQ. Reach out to a
   core Pigweed team member to bypass CQ for Pigweed itself.

#. Update your submodule pin to the submitted commit hash (in most cases
   ``git submodule update --remote path/to/submodule`` should be sufficient,
   but see the
   `git submodule documentation <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Submodules>`_
   for full details)
#. Add that change to the parent project change (``git add path/to/submodule``)
#. Remove the ``patches.json`` file from the change (``git rm patches.json``)
#. Commit and push to Gerrit
#. Click ``Submit to CQ``

After this change is submitted the roller will start working again.

If all changes are to submodules, remove the ``patches.json`` files from both
changes and directly submit, bypassing CQ. Then create a manual roll change that
updates the submodules in question
(``git submodule update --remote submodule1 submodule2``
should be sufficient), upload it, and ``Submit to CQ``.

.. _details:

Details
=======
Sometimes codependent changes must be made in multiple repositories within an
Android Repo Tool workspace or across multiple submodules. This can be done with
the ``patches.json`` files. Given a situation where pigweed change would break
the sample_project, the ``patches.json`` files must each refer to the other
change.

Pigweed ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed", "number": B}]``

Sample Project ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed", "number": A}]``

When running tryjobs for change A, builders will attempt to patch in change B as
well. For pure Pigweed tryjobs this fails but the build continues. For the
tryjobs that are there to ensure Pigweed doesn't break the Sample Project, both
change A and change B will be applied to the checkout.

There is some validation of the format of the ``patches.json`` file, but there's
no error checking on the resolution of the required changes. The assumption is
that changes that actually require other changes to pass CQ will fail if those
changes aren't patched into the workspace.

Requirements are transitive. If A requires B and B requires C then tryjobs for A
will attempt to patch in A, B, and C. Requirements can also be one-way. If a
change has been submitted it's assumed to already be in the checkout and is not
patched in, nor are any transitive requirements processed. Likewise, abandoned
changes are ignored.

.. _banned-codewords:

Banned codewords
================
Sometimes the name of an internal Gerrit instance is a codeword we don't allow
on the Pigweed Gerrit instance. For example, you may wish to do the following.

Pigweed change A ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "secret-project", "number": B}]``

Secret-Project change B ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed", "number": A}]``

This will be rejected by the Pigweed Gerrit instance because using
"secret-project" is banned on that Gerrit instance and you won't be able to
push. Instead, do the following, using the
`requires-helper <https://pigweed-internal.googlesource.com/requires-helper>`_
repository on the Pigweed-Internal Gerrit instance.

Pigweed change A ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed-internal", "number": C}]``

Secret-Project change B ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed", "number": A}]``

Pigweed-Internal change C ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "secret-project", "number": B}]``

The ``pw requires`` command simplifies creation of the Pigweed-Internal change.
In this case the command would be ``pw requires secret-project:B``. Run this
inside the Pigweed repository after committing change A and it will create
change C and add ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed-internal", "number": C}]`` to
change A. Multiple changes can be handled by passing multiple arguments to
``pw requires``.

Public builders won't have access to the Pigweed-Internal Gerrit instance so
they won't even be able to see the ``secret-project`` reference. Internal
builders for other internal projects will see the ``secret-project`` reference
but won't be able to resolve it. Builders having access to ``secret-project``
will see all three changes and attempt to patch all three in. Pigweed-Internal
change C is not included in any workspaces so it will never be patched in, but
it transitively applies requirements to public changes.

Commit message:

docs: Add details to codependent docs
Makes the steps in working around codependent changes more distinct, and
mentions ACL process at a high level to smooth over requests.

Change-Id: If48588f5be2031435c217ab91123b18623e91f86
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/179879
Presubmit-Verified: CQ Bot Account <pigweed-scoped@luci-project-accounts.iam.gserviceaccount.com>
Commit-Queue: Auto-Submit <auto-submit@pigweed-service-accounts.iam.gserviceaccount.com>
Pigweed-Auto-Submit: Armando Montanez <amontanez@google.com>
Reviewed-by: Rob Mohr <mohrr@google.com>

docs/infra/ci_cq_intro.rst, after:

.. _docs-ci-cq-intro:

===========
CI/CQ Intro
===========

.. _essentials:

----------
Essentials
----------

Submitting CLs
==============
The Gerrit ``Submit`` button is hidden, replaced by the ``Submit to CQ``
button. The ``Submit`` button is still accessible behind the ``...`` button
in the top right corner of the Gerrit UI, but in some cases requires elevated
permissions.

Triggering presubmits
=====================
Presubmits are not automatically run when a patch set is uploaded. Click
``CQ Dry Run`` to trigger them. (You can also use
``git push origin +HEAD:refs/for/main%l=Commit-Queue``).

Presubmit validity duration
===========================
If you don't have recent passing results from a ``CQ Dry Run`` (within 24
hours) then ``Submit to CQ`` will run presubmits. After any newly run
presubmits pass this will submit the change.

User interface
==============
If a presubmit fails you'll get a Gerrit comment with a link to the failing
build. The status of tryjobs (pending, running, failed, passed, etc.) is
shown directly in the Gerrit UI (see :ref:`tryjobs`).

Auto-Submit
===========
If you want your change to be automatically submitted when all requirements
are met (``Code-Review +2``, ``OWNERS``-approval, all comments resolved,
etc.) set the ``Auto-Submit`` label to +1. If submission fails it will be
retried a couple times with backoff and then the auto submit job will give up.


.. _further-details:

---------------
Further Details
---------------

Applying changes in testing
===========================
Changes are always rebased on the most recent commit when tested. If they
fail to rebase the build fails.
``CQ Dry Run`` is the same as voting ``Commit-Queue +1`` label and
``Submit to CQ`` is the same as voting ``Commit-Queue +2``. If you vote both
``Code-Review +2`` and ``Commit-Queue +2`` on somebody's change you are
submitting it for them.

Post-Submit builders
====================
Jobs are run post-submission too and can be seen at
https://ci.chromium.org/p/pigweed (for public projects) and
https://ci.chromium.org/p/pigweed-internal (for internal projects). Builders can
also be viewed from Pigweed's :ref:`builder visualization <docs-builder-viz>`.

Non-``main`` branches
=====================
CQ is enabled for all branches. If you upload to an individual repository
branch X and the manifest or superproject also has a branch X, that branch of
the manifest will be used.

Rollers
=======
Just because a change has been submitted doesn't mean it's live in the
project. Submodules and Android Repo Tool projects often need to be
:ref:`rolled <docs-rollers>` before they're in the most recent checkout of the
project.

Presubmit result
================
The ``Presubmit-Verified`` label is set at the completion of CQ runs. It does
not block submission, but can be used by Copybara to see if CQ has passed.
If it looks incorrect, do another CQ run and it will be updated.

.. _docs-builder-viz:

Builder Visualization
=====================

Pigweed's builder visualization simplifies the process of browsing, viewing, and
triggering builders. The source-of-truth for it is Google-internal, but there's
a public version without the Google-internal bits.

 *  `Builder Viz link for external contributors <https://pigweed.googlesource.com/infra/config/+/main/generated/pigweed/for_review_only/viz/index.md>`_
 *  `Builder Viz link for Googlers <https://pigweed-internal.googlesource.com/infra/config/+/main/generated/pigweed/for_review_only/viz/index.md>`_

.. _tryjobs:

-------
Tryjobs
-------
The colors of tryjobs in the Gerrit UI indicate the status of the tryjob: gray
is pending/running, green is passed, red is failed or cancelled, and purple is
an infra failure.

Some tryjobs are not yet stable and are run as "experimental". These can be
viewed with ``Show Experimental Tryjobs``. Experimental tryjobs run with CQ but
do not block it.

Individual tryjobs can be run additional times using the ``Choose Tryjobs``
dialog. This can also be used to run tryjobs that would not normally run on the
change. Tryjobs ran this way can be used to satisfy CQ requirements, but don't
block CQ.

.. _prod-vs-dev:

Prod vs Dev
===========
Most builders have "prod" and "dev" versions. The "prod" versions block changes
in CQ and may cause emails to be sent out if they fail in CI. The "dev" builders
test new VM images before they go to "prod", so if a "dev" builder is failing
when a "prod" builder is not failing, then the "dev" builder is failing because
of an upcoming VM change, and teams should take time to get the "dev" builder to
pass. For most projects, "dev" builders show up on the far right of console
views in the LUCI UI.

.. _tryjobs-cli:

Tryjobs CLI
===========

``bb`` command
--------------
The ``bb`` command is available in a bootstrapped Pigweed environment and the
environments of many downstream projects. It is also available from
`Chromium's depot tools <https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/tools/depot_tools.git>_`.


Querying tryjobs
----------------
In addition to viewing tryjobs in the Gerrit UI, you can use the ``bb`` command
to query the tryjobs that ran on a change. The command to use is
``bb ls -cl $URL``, but ``$URL`` has two non-obvious requirements:

*  It needs to be a ".googlesource.com" URL and not a Google-internal version of
   that URL.
*  It needs to include the patchset number.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ bb ls -cl https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/sample_project/+/53684/1 | egrep -v '^(Tag|By):'
   http://ci.chromium.org/b/8841234941714219488 SUCCESS   'pigweed/try/sample-project-xref-generator'
   Created on 2021-07-19 at 16:45:32, waited 14.8s, started at 16:45:47, ran for 2m43s, ended at 16:48:30
   CL: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/sample_project/+/53684/1

   http://ci.chromium.org/b/8841234941714219504 INFRA_FAILURE 'pigweed/try/sample-project-renode-test'
   Summary: Infra Failure: Step('run pigweed/pw_unit_test/renode/test.sh') (retcode: None)
   Created on 2021-07-19 at 16:45:32, waited 51.6s, started at 16:46:24, ran for 2m40s, ended at 16:49:04
   CL: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/sample_project/+/53684/1

To exclude non-experimental tryjobs, add ``-t cq_experimental:false`` to the
command.

Manually launching tryjobs
--------------------------
In most cases, individual tryjobs can be launched using
``Choose Additional Tryjobs``. If any relevant tryjobs are not listed here
please file a bug.

The ``bb`` command can also be used to launch tryjobs, which can useful for
tracking down race conditions by launching many copies of a tryjob. Please be
careful using this, especially during working hours in California.

.. code-block:: shell

   URL="https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/sample_project/+/53684/1"
   TRYJOB="pigweed/sample_project.try/sample-project-xref-generator"
   for i in $(seq 1 25); do
     bb add -cl "$URL" "$TRYJOB"
   done

.. _why-didnt-lintformat-catch:

Why didn't lintformat catch this formatting change?
===================================================
Rolls of tools like clang can update the preferred format of clang-format. There
are two possibilities for addressing this. First, the tool roll could be blocked
until formatting passes. This could require coordinating several changes across
many repositories. This is further complicated if the new formatting preferred
by clang-format is not accepted by the previous version. Second, lintformat can
be configured to only run on changed files. This means downstream project
lintformat tryjobs would not be run on Pigweed changes, nor on rolls of Pigweed
into these projects.

The second choice was selected. This means when tools roll lintformat jobs may
start failing in CI, but they only fail in CQ on changes that touch files
currently failing in CI. Teams should watch their build alert email list and
proactively fix lintformat failures when they come.

.. _dependent-changes:

-----------------
Dependent changes
-----------------

.. _creating:

Creating
========
To pull in other changes when testing a change add a ``patches.json`` file to
the root of the repository. An example is below.

.. code-block:: json

   [
     {
       "gerrit_name": "pigweed",
       "number": 123456
     },
     {
       "gerrit_name": "pigweed",
       "number": 654321
     }
   ]

Patches can be uni- or bidirectional and are transitive. The tryjob will parse
this file, and then parse any ``patches.json`` files found in the referenced
changes. If requirements are truly one-way, don't list them as two-way. Only the
Gerrit instance name (the part before "-review") is permitted. The repository
name is not included.

.. admonition:: Note
   :class: warning

   ``patches.json`` cannot be used for changes to *the same repo* on the same
   Gerrit host (`b/230610752 <https://issuetracker.google.com/230610752>`_).
   Just stack these changes instead.

.. _submitting:

Submitting
==========
Pigweed's infrastructure does not support submitting multiple changes together.
The best option is to find a way to have changes not depend on each other and
submit them separately, or to have a one-way requirement instead of codependent
changes, and submit the changes in dependency order, waiting for any necessary
rolls before submitting the next change.

Pigweed-related Gerrit hosts are configured to reject submission of all changes
containing ``patches.json`` files. If the dependency is one-way, then submit the
change without dependencies, wait for it to roll (if necessary), remove
``patches.json`` from the dependent change, and vote ``Commit-Queue +2``.

If the changes are truly codependent—both (or all) changes need each other—then
follow the instructions below.

First, get both changes passing CQ with ``patches.json`` files.

Second, if one of the codependent changes is a submodule and another is the
parent project, update the submodule change to no longer include the
``patches.json`` file. Then directly submit the change that lives in the child
submodule, bypassing CQ. This will break the roller, but not the source tree, so
others on your team are unaffected.

.. admonition:: Note

   For the main Pigweed repository, only core Pigweed team members can force
   submit, and they must first
   `request a temporary ACL <http://go/pwi-cookbook#bypass-cq>`_ to do so. This
   process requires an associated bug, so have one on hand before reaching out
   with a force submission request.


Finally, once the change has merged into the child project, update the submodule
pointer in the parent project:

.. admonition:: Note
   :class: warning

   Some projects have limitations on submission outside of CQ. Reach out to a
   core Pigweed team member to bypass CQ for Pigweed itself.

#. Update your submodule pin to the submitted commit hash (in most cases
   ``git submodule update --remote path/to/submodule`` should be sufficient,
   but see the
   `git submodule documentation <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Submodules>`_
   for full details)
#. Add that change to the parent project change (``git add path/to/submodule``)
#. Remove the ``patches.json`` file from the change (``git rm patches.json``)
#. Commit and push to Gerrit
#. Click ``Submit to CQ``

After this change is submitted the roller will start working again.

If all changes are to submodules, remove the ``patches.json`` files from both
changes and directly submit, bypassing CQ. Then create a manual roll change that
updates the submodules in question
(``git submodule update --remote submodule1 submodule2``
should be sufficient), upload it, and ``Submit to CQ``.

.. _details:

Details
=======
Sometimes codependent changes must be made in multiple repositories within an
Android Repo Tool workspace or across multiple submodules. This can be done with
the ``patches.json`` files. Given a situation where pigweed change would break
the sample_project, the ``patches.json`` files must each refer to the other
change.

Pigweed ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed", "number": B}]``

Sample Project ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed", "number": A}]``

When running tryjobs for change A, builders will attempt to patch in change B as
well. For pure Pigweed tryjobs this fails but the build continues. For the
tryjobs that are there to ensure Pigweed doesn't break the Sample Project, both
change A and change B will be applied to the checkout.

There is some validation of the format of the ``patches.json`` file, but there's
no error checking on the resolution of the required changes. The assumption is
that changes that actually require other changes to pass CQ will fail if those
changes aren't patched into the workspace.

Requirements are transitive. If A requires B and B requires C then tryjobs for A
will attempt to patch in A, B, and C. Requirements can also be one-way. If a
change has been submitted it's assumed to already be in the checkout and is not
patched in, nor are any transitive requirements processed. Likewise, abandoned
changes are ignored.

.. _banned-codewords:

Banned codewords
================
Sometimes the name of an internal Gerrit instance is a codeword we don't allow
on the Pigweed Gerrit instance. For example, you may wish to do the following.

Pigweed change A ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "secret-project", "number": B}]``

Secret-Project change B ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed", "number": A}]``

This will be rejected by the Pigweed Gerrit instance because using
"secret-project" is banned on that Gerrit instance and you won't be able to
push. Instead, do the following, using the
`requires-helper <https://pigweed-internal.googlesource.com/requires-helper>`_
repository on the Pigweed-Internal Gerrit instance.

Pigweed change A ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed-internal", "number": C}]``

Secret-Project change B ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed", "number": A}]``

Pigweed-Internal change C ``patches.json``
  ``[{"gerrit_name": "secret-project", "number": B}]``

The ``pw requires`` command simplifies creation of the Pigweed-Internal change.
In this case the command would be ``pw requires secret-project:B``. Run this
inside the Pigweed repository after committing change A and it will create
change C and add ``[{"gerrit_name": "pigweed-internal", "number": C}]`` to
change A. Multiple changes can be handled by passing multiple arguments to
``pw requires``.

Public builders won't have access to the Pigweed-Internal Gerrit instance so
they won't even be able to see the ``secret-project`` reference. Internal
builders for other internal projects will see the ``secret-project`` reference
but won't be able to resolve it. Builders having access to ``secret-project``
will see all three changes and attempt to patch all three in. Pigweed-Internal
change C is not included in any workspaces so it will never be patched in, but
it transitively applies requirements to public changes.
