docker/docs.rst, before:

------
docker
------
``pw_env_setup`` reliably initializes a working environment for Pigweed, but
can take awhile to run. It intelligently caches where it can, but that caching
is designed around a particular execution environment. That environment
assumption is poor when running tests with docker. To help out teams using
docker for automated testing, the Pigweed team has a publicly-available docker
image with a cache of some of the Pigweed environment. The current tag of this
image is in ``docker/tag`` under the Pigweed checkout.

To build your own docker image, start with ``docker/Dockerfile.cache`` and
run ``docker build --file docker/Dockerfile.cache .`` from the root of your
Pigweed checkout.

To use the publicly-available docker image, run
``docker build --file docker/Dockerfile.run --build-arg from=$(cat docker/tag) .``
from the root of your Pigweed checkout. You still need to run
``. ./bootstrap.sh`` within the docker image, but it should complete much
faster than on a vanilla docker image.

We're still trying to improve this process, so if you have any ideas for
improvements please `send us a note`_.

.. _send us a note: pigweed@googlegroups.com

Commit message:

docker: Copyedit the existing doc
Adding section headings makes the doc easier to scan. "Docker"
should be capitalized when referring to the general product. The
call-to-action was updated to point people to the issue tracker
rather than sending an email.

Change-Id: I9994080a3af4987d9d3b42f87eae88496e2a8648
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/151057
Reviewed-by: Chad Norvell <chadnorvell@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Auto-Submit <auto-submit@pigweed.google.com.iam.gserviceaccount.com>
Reviewed-by: Kayce Basques <kayce@google.com>
Pigweed-Auto-Submit: Kayce Basques <kayce@google.com>
Presubmit-Verified: CQ Bot Account <pigweed-scoped@luci-project-accounts.iam.gserviceaccount.com>

docker/docs.rst, after:

------
Docker
------
``pw_env_setup`` reliably initializes a working environment for Pigweed, but
can take awhile to run. It intelligently caches where it can, but that caching
is designed around a particular execution environment. That environment
assumption is poor when running tests with Docker. To help out teams using
Docker for automated testing, the Pigweed team has a publicly-available Docker
image with a cache of some of the Pigweed environment. The current tag of this
image is in ``docker/tag`` under the Pigweed checkout.

We're still trying to improve this process, so if you have any ideas for
improvements please `create an issue`_.

.. _create an issue: https://issues.pigweed.dev/issues?q=status:open

Build your own Docker image
===========================

To build your own Docker image, start with ``docker/Dockerfile.cache`` and
run ``docker build --file docker/Dockerfile.cache .`` from the root of your
Pigweed checkout.

Use the publicly available Docker image
=======================================

To use the publicly-available Docker image, run
``docker build --file docker/Dockerfile.run --build-arg from=$(cat docker/tag) .``
from the root of your Pigweed checkout. You still need to run
``. ./bootstrap.sh`` within the Docker image, but it should complete much
faster than on a vanilla Docker image.
