.. _seed-0103:

============================================
0103: pw_protobuf: Past, present, and future
============================================
.. seed::
   :number: 0103
   :name: pw_protobuf: Past, present, and future
   :status: Accepted
   :proposal_date: 2023-08-16
   :cl: 133971
   :authors: Alexei Frolov
   :facilitator: Armando Montanez

-------
Summary
-------
``pw_protobuf`` is one of Pigweed's oldest modules and has become a foundational
component of Pigweed and Pigweed-based projects. At its core, ``pw_protobuf``
provides a compact and efficient `protobuf <https://protobuf.dev>`_ wire format
encoder and decoder, but as third-party usage has grown, additional higher-level
APIs have sprung up, many of which were contributed by third-party developers to
address use cases within their own projects.

The growth of ``pw_protobuf`` was not entirely controlled, which has resulted in
a lack of cohesion among its components, incomplete implementations, and
implicit, undocumented limitations. This has made the module difficult to
approach for new users and put a lasting maintenance burden on the core Pigweed
team.

This document explores the state of ``pw_protobuf`` and proposes a plan to
resolve the issues present in the module, both in the immediate short term and
a longer term vision.

---------------------------
Summary of Proposed Changes
---------------------------
The table below summarizes the states of the different ``pw_protobuf``
components following acceptance of this SEED. The reasoning behind these changes
is explained in further detail throughout the rest of the SEED.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Component
     - Status
     - Details
   * - Wire format encoder/decoder
     - Supported
     - * ``pw_protobuf``'s primary API.
       * Codegen helpers for convenient use.
       * Works with streams and direct buffers.
       * Recommended for compact and efficient protobuf operations.
   * - Find API
     - Supported
     - * Useful for extracting fields from messages without having to set up a
         decoder.
       * Recommended as an alternative for in-memory objects for small, simple
         messages.
       * Will be expanded with better support for repeated fields.
   * - Nanopb integration (build system / RPC)
     - Supported
     - * Recommended for newer projects that want a complete object model for
         their protobuf messages.
       * Recommended by default for RPC services.
       * Can easily be used alongside lower-level ``pw_protobuf`` APIs in cases
         where more control is required.
   * - Message API (``message.h``)
     - Deprecated
     - * Superseded by other APIs.
       * Only used by one project.
       * Code will be removed.
   * - Message structures
     - **Short-term:** Discouraged

       **Long-term:** Deprecated
     - * Will remain supported for existing users indefinitely, though no new
         features will be added.
       * Docs will be updated to clearly detail its limitations.
       * Not recommended to new users; Nanopb or the low-level APIs should be
         preferred.
       * Will be replaced with a newer ``pw_protobuf`` object model at an
         unspecified future point.
       * Code will remain until the new model is fully implemented and existing
         users have had time to migrate (with Pigweed assistance for internal
         customers).
   * - ``pwpb_rpc``
     - **Short-term:** Discouraged

       **Long-term:** Deprecated
     - * Will remain supported for existing users indefinitely, though no new
         features will be added.
       * Not recommended to new users; ``nanopb_rpc`` and/or raw methods should
         be preferred.
       * When the new ``pw_protobuf`` object model is added, it will come with
         updated RPC integration.
       * Code will remain until the new model is fully implemented and existing
         users have had time to migrate (with Pigweed assistance for internal
         customers).
   * - New ``pw_protobuf`` object model
     - **Long-term:** Planned
     - * Intended to replace existing message structures as the premier
         in-memory object model, with a more complete implementation of the
         protobuf spec.
       * Investigation and design will be examined in a future SEED.

----------------------------
Background and Current State
----------------------------

Protobuf Components
===================
``pw_protobuf`` today consists of several different layered APIs, which are
explored below.

Core encoder and decoder
------------------------
``pw_protobuf``'s core low-level APIs interact directly with the
`Protobuf wire format <https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/encoding/>`_,
processing each field appearing in a message individually without any notion of
higher-level message semantics such as repeated or optional fields. These APIs
are compact and highly-capable; they are able to construct any valid protobuf
message, albeit by pushing much of the burden onto users to ensure that they do
not encode fields in violation of their messages' schemas.

Origin
^^^^^^
The idea for direct wire encoding originated prior to the inception of Pigweed,
when the team was setting up crash reporting for a project. Crash diagnostic
data was transmitted from each device as a protobuf message, which was encoded
using `nanopb <https://jpa.kapsi.fi/nanopb/>`_, a popular lightweight,
embedded-friendly protobuf library for serializing and deserializing protobuf
data to and from C structs.

To send crash reports, a single, statically-allocated crash message struct was
populated by the device's various subsystems, before being serialized to a
buffer and queued for transmission over the appropriate interface. The fields of
this struct ranged from single integers to complex nested messages. The nature
of nanopb in a static memory environment required each variable-length field in
the generated message to be reserved for its maximum allowable size, which
quickly blew up in the cases of large strings and repeated submessages. All in
all, the generated crash struct clocked in at around 12KB --- several times
larger than its encoded size --- a high price to pay for such a
memory-constrained device.

This large overhead raised the question of whether it was necessary to store the
crash data in an intermediate format, or if this could be eliminated. By the
nature of the protobuf wire format, it is possible to build up a message in
parts, writing one field at a time. Due to this, it would be possible for each
subsystem to be passed some serializer which would allow them to write their
fields directly to the final output buffer, avoiding any additional in-memory
storage. This would be especially beneficial for variable-length fields, where
systems could write only as much data as they had at the moment, avoiding the
overhead of worst-case reservations. ``pw_protobuf`` was conceptualized as this
type of wire serializer, providing a convenient wrapper around direct
field-by-field serialization.

While the project ended up shipping with their original ``nanopb`` setup, a
prototype of this serializer was written as a proof of concept, and ended up
being refined to support all basic protobuf operations as one of the first
modules offered by the newly-started Pigweed project.

Implementation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The core encoders have undergone several iterations over time. The
:cs:`original implementation <bbf164c985576a348f3bcd4c48b3e9fd8a464a66:pw_protobuf/public/pw_protobuf/encoder.h;l=25>`
offered a simple API to directly serialize single protobuf fields to an
in-memory buffer through a series of typed ``Encode`` functions. Message
nesting was handled manually by the user, calling a ``Push`` function to begin
writing fields to a submessage, followed by ``Pop`` on completion.

The decoder was a
:cs:`later addition <6d9b9b447b84afb60e714ebd97523ee55b93c9a6:pw_protobuf/public/pw_protobuf/decoder.h;l=23>`,
initially invoking a callback on each field in the serialized message with its
field number, giving the users the ability to extract the field by calling the
appropriate typed ``Decode`` function. This was implemented via a
``DecodeHandler`` virtual interface, and it persists to this day as
``CallbackDecoder``. However, this proved to be too cumbersome to use, so the
main decoder was :cs:`rewritten <fe9723cd67796e9236022cde6ef42cda99682d77>`
in the style of an iterator where users manually advanced it through the
serialized fields, decoding those which they cared about.

Streaming enhancement
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The original encoder and decoder were designed to operate on messages which fit
into buffers directly in memory. However, as the ``pw_stream`` interface was
stabilized and adopted, there was interest in processing protobuf messages whose
data was not fully available (for example, reading out of flash
sector-by-sector). This prompted another rewrite of the core classes to make
``pw::Stream`` the interface to the serialized data. This was done differently
for the encoder and decoder: the encoder only operates on streams, with
``MemoryEncoder`` becoming a shallow wrapper instantiating a ``MemoryWriter`` on
top of a buffer, whereas the decoder ended up having two separate, parallel
``StreamDecoder`` and ``MemoryDecoder`` implementations.

The reason for this asymmetry has to do with the manner in which the two were
implemented. The encoder was
:cs:`rewritten first <0ed221cbb8b943205dea4ac315fe1d4b1e6b7371>`,
and carefully designed to function on top of the limited semantic guarantees
offered by ``pw_stream``. Following this redesign, it seemed obvious and natural
to use the existing MemoryStream to provide the previous encoding functionality
nearly transparently. However, when reviewing this implementation with the
larger team, several potential issues were noted. What was previously a simple
memory access to write a protobuf field became an expensive virtual call which
could not be elided. The common use case of serializing a message to a buffer
had become significantly less performant, prompting concerns about the impact of
the change. Additionally, it was noted that this performance impact would be far
worse on the decoding side, where serialized varints had to be read one byte at
a time.

As a result, it was decided that a larger analysis was required. To aid this,
the stream-based decoder would be implemented separately to the existing memory
decoder so that direct comparisons could be made between the two
implementations. Unfortunately, the performance of the two implementations was
never properly analyzed as the team became entangled in higher priority
commitments.

.. code-block:: c++

   class StreamEncoder {
    public:
     constexpr StreamEncoder(stream::Writer& writer, ByteSpan scratch_buffer);

     Status WriteUint32(uint32_t field_number, uint32_t value);
     Status WriteString(uint32_t field_number, std::string_view value);
   };

*A subset of the StreamEncoder API, demonstrating its low-level field writing
operations.*

Wire format code generation
---------------------------
``pw_protobuf`` provides lightweight generated code wrappers on top of its core
wire format encoder and decoder which eliminate the need to provide the correct
field number and type when writing/reading serialized fields. Each generated
function calls directly into the underlying encoder/decoder API, in theory
making them zero-overhead wrappers.

The encoder codegen was part of the original implementation of ``pw_protobuf``.
It constituted a ``protoc`` plugin written in Python, and several GN build
templates to define protobuf libraries and invoke ``protoc`` on them to create
a C++ target which could be depended on by others. The build integration was
added separately to the main protobuf module, as ``pw_protobuf_compiler``, and
has since expanded to support many different protobuf code generators in various
languages.

The decoder codegen was added at a much later date, alongside the struct object
model. Like the encoder codegen, it defines wrappers around the underlying
decoder functions which populate values for each of a message's fields, though
users are still required to manually iterate through the message and extract
each field.

.. code-block:: c++

   class FooEncoder : public ::pw::protobuf::StreamEncoder {
     Status WriteBar(uint32_t value) {
       return ::pw::protobuf::StreamEncoder::WriteUint32(
           static_cast<uint32_t>(Fields::kBar), value);
     }
   };

*An example of how a generated encoder wrapper calls into the underlying
operation.*

Message API
-----------
The ``Message`` API was the first attempt at providing higher-level semantic
wrappers on top of ``pw_protobuf``'s direct wire serialization. It was developed
in conjunction with the implementation of Pigweed's software update flow for a
project and addressed several use cases that came up with the way the project
stored its update bundle metadata.

This API works on the decoding side only, giving users easier access to fields
of a serialized message. It provides functions which scan a message for a field
using its field number (similar to the ``Find`` APIs discussed later). However,
instead of deserializing the field and returning its data directly, these APIs
give the user a typed handle to the field which can be used to read it.

These field handles apply protobuf semantics beyond the field-by-field iteration
of the low level decoder. For example, a field can be accessed as a repeated
field, whose handle provides a C++ iterator over each instance of the field in
the serialized message. Additionally, ``Message`` is the only API currently in
``pw_protobuf`` which allows users to work directly with protobuf ``map``
fields, reading key-value pairs from a message.

.. code-block:: c++

   // Parse repeated field `repeated string rep_str = 5;`
   RepeatedStrings rep_str = message.AsRepeatedString(5);
   // Iterate through the entries. For iteration
   for (String element : rep_str) {
     // Process str
   }

   // Parse map field `map<string, bytes> str_to_bytes = 7;`
   StringToBytesMap str_to_bytes = message.AsStringToBytesMap(7);
   // Access the entry by a given key value
   Bytes bytes_for_key = str_to_bytes["key"];
   // Or iterate through map entries
   for (StringToBytesMapEntry entry : str_to_bytes) {
     String key = entry.Key();
     Bytes value = entry.Value();
     // Process entry
   }

*Examples of reading repeated and map fields from a serialized protobuf using
the Message API.*

Message structures
------------------
``pw_protobuf``'s message structure API is its premier high-level, in-memory
object model. It was contributed by an external team with some guidance from
Pigweed developers and was driven largely by a desire to work conveniently with
protobufs in RPC methods without the burden of a third-party dependency in
``nanopb`` (the only officially supported protobuf library in RPC at the time).

Message structures function similarly to more conventional protobuf libraries,
where every definition in a ``.proto`` file generates a corresponding C++
object. In the case of ``pw_protobuf``, these objects are defined as structs
containing the fields of their protobuf message as members. Functions are
provided to encode from or decode to one of these structs, removing the manual
per-field processing from the lower-level APIs.

Each field in a protobuf message becomes an inline member of its generated
struct. Protobuf types are mapped to C++ types where possible, with special
handling of protobuf specifiers and variable-length fields. Fields labeled as
optional are wrapped in a ``std::optional`` from the STL. Fields labeled as
``oneof`` are not supported (in fact, the code generator completely ignores the
keyword). Variable-length fields can either be inlined or handled through
callbacks invoked by the encoder or decoder when processing the message. If
inlined, a container sized to a user-specified maximum length is generated. For
strings, this is a ``pw::InlineString`` while most other fields use a
``pw::Vector``.

Similar to nanopb, users can pass options to the ``pw_protobuf`` generator
through the protobuf compiler to configure their generated message structures.
These allow specifying the maximum size of variable-length fields, setting a
fixed size, or forcing the use of callbacks for encoding and decoding. Options
maybe be specified inline in the proto file or listed in a separate file
(conventionally named ``.options``) to avoid leaking ``pw_protobuf``-specific
metadata into protobuf files that may be shared across multiple languages and
protobuf compiler contexts.

Unlike the lower-level generated classes which require custom per-field encoding
and decoding functions, message serialization is handled generically through the
use of a field descriptor table. The descriptor table for a message contains an
entry for each of its fields, storing its type, field number, and other metadata
alongside its offset within the generated message structure. This table is
generated once per message defined in a protobuf file, trading a small
additional memory overhead for reduced code size when serializing and
deserializing data.

.. code-block:: proto

   message Customer {
     int32 age = 1;
     string name = 2;
     optional fixed32 loyalty_id = 3;
   }

.. code-block:: c++

  struct Customer::Message {
    int32_t age;
    pw::InlineString<32> name;
    std::optional<uint32_t> loyalty_id;
  };

*Example of how a protobuf message definition is converted as a C++ struct.*

Find API
--------
``pw_protobuf``'s set of ``Find`` APIs constitute functions for extracting
single fields from serialized messages. The functions scan the message for a
field number and decode it as a specified protobuf type. Like the core
serialization APIs, there are two levels to ``Find``: direct low-level typed
functions, and generated code functions that invoke these for named protobuf
fields.

Extracting a single field is a common protobuf use case, and was envisioned
early in ``pw_protobuf``'s development. An initial version of ``Find`` was
started shortly after the original callback-based decoder was implemented,
providing a ``DecodeHandler`` to scan for a specific field number in a message.
This version was never fully completed and did not see any production use. More
recently, the ``Find`` APIs were revisited and reimplemented on top of the
iterative decoder.

.. code-block:: c++

   pw::Result<uint32_t> age = Customer::FindAge(serialized_customer);
   if (age.ok()) {
     PW_LOG_INFO("Age is %u", age.value());
   }

*An example of using a generated Find function to extract a field from a
serialized protobuf message.*

RPC integration
---------------
Pigweed RPC exchanges data in the form of protobufs and was designed to allow
users to implement their services using different protobuf libraries, with some
supported officially. Supporting the use of ``pw_protobuf`` had been a goal from
the beginning, but it was never implemented on top of the direct wire encoders
and decoders. Despite this, several RPC service implementations in Pigweed and
customer projects ended up using ``pw_protobuf`` on top of the raw RPC method
API, manually decoding and encoding messages.

When message structures were contributed, they came with an expansion of RPC to
allow their usage in method implementations, becoming the second officially
supported protobuf library. ``pw_protobuf`` methods are structured and behave
similarly to RPC's nanopb-based methods, automatically deserializing requests
from and serializing responses to their generated message structures.

What Works Well
===============
Overall, ``pw_protobuf`` has been a largely successful module despite its
growing pains. It has become an integral part of Pigweed, used widely upstream
across major components of the system, including logging and crash reporting.
Several Pigweed customers have also shown to favor ``pw_protobuf``, choosing it
over other embedded protobuf libraries like nanopb.

The list below summarizes some of ``pw_protobuf``'s successes.

**Overall**

* Widespread adoption across Pigweed and Pigweed-based projects.

* Easy to integrate into a project which uses Pigweed's build system.

* Often comes at a minimal additional cost to projects, as the core of
  ``pw_protobuf`` is already used by popular upstream modules.

**Core wire format encoders/decoders**

* Simple, intuitive APIs which give users a lot of control over the structure
  of their messages.

* Lightweight in terms of code size and memory use.

**Codegen general**

* Build system integration is extensive and generally simple to use.

* Low-level codegen wrappers are convenient to use without sacrificing the
  power of the underlying APIs.

**Message API**

* Though only used by a single project, it works well for their needs and
  gives them extensive semantic processing of serialized messages without the
  overhead of decoding to a full in-memory object.

* More capable processing than the Find APIs: for example, allowing iteration
  over elements of a repeated field.

* As the entire API is stream-based, it permits useful operations such as
  giving the user a bounded stream over a bytes field of the message,
  eliminating the need for an additional copy of data.

* Support for protobuf maps, something which is absent from any other
  ``pw_protobuf`` API.

**Message Structures**

* Message structures work incredibly well for the majority of simple use cases,
  making protobufs easy to use without having to understand the details of the
  wire format.

* Adoption of ``pw_protobuf`` increased following the addition of this API and
  corresponding RPC support, indicating that it is more valuable to a typical
  user who is not concerned with the minor efficiencies offered by the
  lower-level APIs.

* Encoding and decoding messages is efficient due to the struct model's generic
  table-based implementation. Users do not have to write custom code to process
  each message as they would with the lower-level APIs, resulting in reduced
  overall code size in some cases.

* Nested messages are far easier to handle than in any other API, which require
  additional setup creating sub-encoders/decoders.

* The use of containers such as ``pw::Vector`` for repeated fields simplifies
  their use and avoids the issues of similar libraries such as nanopb, where
  users have to remember to manually set their length.

**Find API**

* Eliminates a lot of boilerplate in the common use case where only a single
  field from a message needs to be read.

**RPC integration**

* Has seen a high rate of adoption as it provides a convenient API to read and
  write requests and responses without requiring the management of a third-party
  library dependency.

* ``pw_protobuf``-based RPC services can still fall back on the raw RPC API in
  instances where more flexible handling is required.

The Issues
==========

Overview
--------
This section shows a summary of the known issues present at each layer of the
current ``pw_protobuf`` module. Several of these issues will be explored in
further detail later.

**Overall**

* Lack of an overall vision and cohesive story: What is ``pw_protobuf`` trying
  to be and what kinds of users does it target? Where does it fit into the
  larger protobuf ecosystem?

* Documentation structure doesn't clearly guide users. Should be addressed in
  conjunction with the larger :ref:`SEED-0102 <seed-0102>` effort.

* Too many overlapping implementations. We should focus on one model with a
  clear delineation between its layers.

* Despite describing itself as a lightweight and efficient protobuf library,
  little size reporting and performance statistics are provided to substantiate
  these claims.

**Core wire format encoders/decoders**

* Parallel memory and stream decoder implementations which don't share any code.
  They also have different APIs, e.g. using ``Result`` (stream decoder) vs. a
  ``Status`` and output pointer (memory decoder).

* Effectively-deprecated APIs still exist (e.g. ``CallbackDecoder``).

* Inefficiencies when working with varints and streams. When reading a varint
  from a message, the ``StreamDecoder`` consumes its stream one byte at a time,
  each going through a potentially costly virtual call to the underlying
  implementation.

**Codegen general**

* The headers generated by ``pw_protobuf`` are poorly structured. Some users
  have observed large compiler memory usage parsing them, which may be related.

* Each message in a ``.proto`` file generates a namespace in C++, in which its
  generated classes appear. This is unintuitive and difficult to use, with most
  users resorting to a mess of using statements at the top of each file that
  works with protobufs.

* Due to the way ``pw_protobuf`` appends its own namespace to users' proto
  packages, it is not always possible to deduce where this namespace will exist
  in external compilation units. To work around this, a somewhat hacky approach
  is used where every generated ``pw_protobuf`` namespace is aliased within a
  root-level namespace scope.

* While basic codegen works in all build systems, only the GN build supports
  the full capabilities of ``pw_protobuf``. Several essential features, such as
  options files, are missing from other builds.

* There appear to be issues with how the codegen steps are exposed to the CMake
  build graph, preventing protobuf files from being regenerated as a result of
  some codegen script modifications.

* Protobuf editions, the modern replacement for the proto2 and proto3 syntax
  options, are not supported by the code generator. Files using them fail to
  compile.

**Message API**

* The message API as a whole has been superseded by the structure API, and there
  is no reason for it to be used.

**Message structures**

* Certain types of valid proto messages are impossible to represent due to
  language limitations. For example, as message structs directly embed
  submessages, a circular dependency between nested messages cannot exist.

* Optional proto fields are represented in C++ by ``std::optional``. This has
  several issues:

  * Memory overhead as a result of storing each field's presence flag
    individually.

  * Inconsistent with how other protobuf libraries function. Typically, field
    presence is exposed through a separate API, with accessors always
    returning a value (the default if absent).

* Not all types of fields are supported. Optional strings and optional
  submessages do not work (the generator effectively ignores the ``optional``
  specifier). ``oneof`` fields do not work.

* Not all options work for all fields. Fixed/max size specifiers to inline
  repeated fields generally only work for simple field types --- callbacks must
  be used otherwise.

* In cases where the generator does not support something, it often does not
  indicate this to the user, silently outputting incorrect code instead.

* Options files share both a filename and some option names with other protobuf
  libraries, namely Nanopb. This can cause issues when trying to use the same
  protobuf definition in different contexts, as the options do not always work
  the same way in both.

**Find API**

* Lack of support for repeated fields. Only the first element will be found.

* Similarly, does not support recurring non-repeated fields. The protobuf
  specification requires that scalar fields are overridden if they reappear,
  while string, bytes, or submessage fields are merged.

* Only one layer of searching is supported; it is not possible to look up a
  nested field.

* The stream version of the Find API does not allow scanning for submessages due
  to limitations with the ownership and lifetime of its decoder.

**RPC integration**

* RPC creates and runs message encoders and decoders for the user. Therefore, it
  is not possible to use any messages with callback-based fields in RPC method
  implementations.

Deep dive on selected issues
----------------------------

Generated namespaces
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
``pw_protobuf``'s generator was written to output a namespace for each message
in a file from its first implementation, on top of which all subsequent
generated code was added.

The reason for this unusual design choice was to work around C++'s
declaration-before-definition rule to allow circularly-referential protobuf
messages. Each message's associated generated classes are first forward-declared
at the start of the generated header, and later defined as necessary.

For example, given a message ``Foo``, the following code is generated:

.. code-block:: c++

   namespace Foo {

   // Message field numbers.
   enum Fields;

   // Generated struct.
   struct Message;

   class StreamEncoder;
   class StreamDecoder;

   // Some other metadata omitted.

   }  // namespace Foo

The more intuitive approach of generating a struct/class directly for each
message is difficult, if not impossible, to cleanly implement under the current
``pw_protobuf`` object model. There are several reasons why this is, with the
primary being that cross-message dependencies cannot easily be generated due to
the aforementioned declaration issues. C++ does not allow forward-declaring a
subclass, so certain types of nested message relationships are not directly
representable. Some potential workarounds have been suggested for this, such as
defining struct members as aliases to internally-generated types, but we have
been unable to get this correctly working following a timeboxed prototyping
session.

Message structures
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Many of the issues with message structs stem from the same language limitations
as those described above with namespacing. As the generated structures' members
are embedded directly within them and publicly exposed, it is not possible to
represent certain types of valid protobuf messages. Additionally, the way
certain types of fields are generated is problematic, as described below.

**Optional fields**

A field labeled as ``optional`` in a proto file generates a struct member
wrapped in a ``std::optional`` from the C++ STL. This choice is semantically
inconsistent with how the official protobuf libraries in other languages are
designed. Typically, accessing a field will always return a valid value. In the
case of absence, the field is populated with its default value (the zero value
unless otherwise specified). Presence checking is implemented as a parallel API
for users who require it.

This choice also results in additional memory overhead, as each field's presence
flag is stored within its optional wrapper, padding what could otherwise be a
single bit to a much larger aligned size. In the conventional disconnected model
of field presence, the generated object could instead store a bitfield with an
entry for each of its members, compacting its overall size.

Optional fields are not supported for all types. The compiler ignores the
``optional`` specifier when it is set on string fields, as well as on nested
messages, generating the member as a regular field and serializing it per
standard ``proto3`` rules, omitting a zero-valued entry.

Implementing ``optional`` the typical way would require hiding the members of
each generated message, instead providing accessor functions to modify them,
checking for presence and inserting default values where appropriate.

**Oneof fields**

The ``pw_protobuf`` code generator completely ignores the ``oneof`` specifier
when processing a message. When multiple fields are listed within a ``oneof``
block in a ``.proto`` file, the generated struct will contain all of them as
direct members without any notion of exclusivity. This permits ``pw_protobuf``
to encode semantically invalid protobuf messages: if multiple members of a
``oneof`` are set, the encoder will serialize all of them, creating a message
that is unprocessable by other protobuf libraries.

For example, given the following protobuf definition:

.. code-block:: proto

   message Foo {
     oneof variant {
       uint32 a = 1;
       uint32 b = 2;
     }
   }

The generator will output the following struct, allowing invalid messages to be
written.

.. code-block:: c++

   struct Foo::Message {
     uint32_t a;
     uint32_t b;
   };

   // This will work and create a semantically invalid message.
   Foo::StreamEncoder encoder;
   encoder.Write({.a = 32, .b = 100});

Similarly to ``optional``, the best approach to support ``oneof`` would be to
hide the members of each message and provide accessors. This would avoid the
risk of incorrectly reading memory (such as a wrong ``union`` member) and not
require manual bookkeeping as in nanopb.

--------
Proposal
--------

Short-term Plan
===============
A full rework of ``pw_protobuf`` does not seem feasible at this point in time
due to limited resourcing. As a result, the most reasonable course of action is
to tie up the loose ends of the existing code, and leave the module in a state
where it functions properly in every supported use case, with unsupported use
cases made explicit.

The important steps to making this happen are listed below.

* Restructure the module documentation to help users select which protobuf API
  is best suited for them, and add a section explicitly detailing the
  limitations of each.

* Deprecate and hide the ``Message`` API, as it has been superseded by the
  ``Find`` APIs.

* Discourage usage of message structures in new code, while providing a
  comprehensive upfront explanation of their limitations and unsupported use
  cases, including:

  * ``oneof`` cannot be used.

  * Inlining some types of repeated fields such as submessages is not possible.
    Callbacks must be used to encode and decode them.

  * The use of ``optional`` only generates optional struct members for simple
    scalar fields. More complex optional fields must be processed through
    callbacks.

* Update the code generator to loudly fail when it encounters an unsupported
  message or field structure.

* Discourage the use of the automatic ``pw_protobuf`` RPC generator due to the
  limitations with message structures. ``nanopb`` or manually processed ``raw``
  methods should be used instead.

  Similarly, clearly document the limitations around callback-based messages in
  RPCs methods, and provide examples of how to fall back to raw RPC encoding and
  decoding.

* Move all upstream usage of ``pw_protobuf`` away from message structures and
  ``pwpb_rpc`` to the lower-level direct wire APIs, or rarely Nanopb.

* Rename the options files used by ``pw_protobuf``'s message structs to
  distinguish them from Nanopb options.

* Make the ``pw_protobuf`` code generator aware of the protobuf edition option
  so that message definitions using it can be compiled.

* Extend full protobuf code generation support to the Bazel and CMake builds, as
  well as the Android build integration.

* Minimize the amount of duplication in the code generator to clean up generated
  header files and attempt to reduce compiler memory usage.

* Extend the ``Find`` APIs with support for repeated fields to bring them closer
  to the Message API's utility.

Long-term Plan
==============
This section lays out a long term design vision for ``pw_protobuf``. There is no
estimated timeframe on when this work will happen, but the ideas are collected
here for future reference.

Replace message structures
--------------------------
As discussed above, most issues with message structures stem from having members
exposed directly. Obscuring the internal details of messages and providing
public accessor APIs gives the flexibility to fix the existing problems without
running against language limitations or exposing additional complexity to users.

By doing so, the internal representation of a message is no longer directly tied
to C++'s type system. Instead of defining typed members for each field in a
message, the entire message structure could consist of an intermediate binary
representation, with fields located at known offsets alongside necessary
metadata. This avoids the declaration and aliasing issues, as types are now only
required to be defined at access rather than storage.

This would require a complete rewrite which would be incompatible with the
current APIs. The least invasive way to handle it would be to create an entirely
new code generator, port over the core lower level generator functionality, and
build the new messages on top of it. The old API would then be fully deprecated,
and users could migrate over one message at a time, with assistance from the
Pigweed team for internal customers.

Investigate standardization of wire format operations
-----------------------------------------------------
``pw_protobuf`` is one of many libraries, both within Google and externally,
that re-implements protobuf wire format processing. At the time it was written,
this made sense, as there was no convenient option that fit the niche that
``pw_protobuf`` targeted. However, since then, the core protobuf team has
heavily invested in the development of `upb <https://github.com/protocolbuffers/upb>`_:
a compact, low-level protobuf backend intended to be wrapped by higher-level
libraries in various languages. Many of upb's core design goals align with the
initial vision for ``pw_protobuf``, making it worthwhile to coordinate with its
developers to see it may be suitable for use in Pigweed.

Preliminary investigations into upb have shown that, while small in size, it is
still larger than the core of ``pw_protobuf`` as it is a complete protobuf
library supporting the entire protobuf specification. Not all of that is
required for Pigweed or its customers, so any potential reuse would likely be
contingent on the ability to selectively remove unnecessary parts.

At the time of writing, upb does not have a stable API or ABI. While this is
okay for first-party consumers, shipping it as part of Pigweed may present
additional maintenance issues.

Nonetheless, synchronizing with upb to share learnings and potentially reduce
duplicated effort should be an essential step in any future ``pw_protobuf``
work.
