pw_bluetooth_sapphire/docs.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_bluetooth_sapphire:

=====================
pw_bluetooth_sapphire
=====================
.. pigweed-module::
   :name: pw_bluetooth_sapphire

.. attention::
  This module is still under construction. There is no public API yet. Please
  contact the Pigweed team if you are interested in using this module.

The ``pw_bluetooth_sapphire`` module provides a dual-mode Bluetooth Host stack
that will implement the :ref:`module-pw_bluetooth` APIs.  Sapphire originated as
the Fuchsia operating system's Bluetooth stack and is used in production. The
Sapphire Host stack has been migrated into the Pigweed project for use in
embedded projects. However, as it was not written in an embedded context, there
is a lot of work to be done to optimize memory usage.

Why use Sapphire?

* **Open source**, unlike vendor Bluetooth stacks. This makes debugging and
  fixing issues much easier!
* **Integrated with Pigweed**. Logs, asserts, randomness, time, async, strings,
  and more are all using Pigweed modules.
* **Excellent test coverage**, unlike most Bluetooth stacks. This means fewer
  bugs and greater maintainability.
* **Certified**. Sapphire was certified by the Bluetooth SIG after passing
  all conformance tests.
* **A great API**. Coming 2024. See :ref:`module-pw_bluetooth`.

-------
Roadmap
-------
* Support Bazel
* Support CMake
* Implement :ref:`module-pw_bluetooth` APIs
* Optimize memory footprint
* Add snoop log capture support
* Add metrics
* Add configuration options (LE only, Classic only, etc.)
* Add CLI for controlling stack over RPC

Commit message:

pw_{bluetooth_sapphire, env_setup, presubmit}: Fuchsia SDK example
Support building Fuchsia components and packages via the Fuchsia Bazel
SDK.

Modifies the behavior of `cipd_repository` to not overwrite the fetched
repository's BUILD.bazel file if `build_file` is not specified and one
already exists in the cipd package.

Add a simple hello_world component and build in presubmits to
demonstrate basic functionality.

Building test packages requires bumping gtest to include [1], which will
be handled in a follow-up cl.

[1]: https://github.com/google/googletest/commit/3b6d48e8d5c1d9b3f9f10ac030a94008bfaf032b

Bug: 42178254
Fixed: 321267547, 321267352, 321266805, 321266740
Change-Id: I618314d52988b4c0184832d13dfc278f9b145d6c
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/196450
Reviewed-by: Ted Pudlik <tpudlik@google.com>
Reviewed-by: Kayce Basques <kayce@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Darren Chan <chandarren@google.com>

pw_bluetooth_sapphire/docs.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_bluetooth_sapphire:

=====================
pw_bluetooth_sapphire
=====================
.. pigweed-module::
   :name: pw_bluetooth_sapphire

.. attention::
  This module is still under construction. There is no public API yet. Please
  contact the Pigweed team if you are interested in using this module.

The ``pw_bluetooth_sapphire`` module provides a dual-mode Bluetooth Host stack
that will implement the :ref:`module-pw_bluetooth` APIs.  Sapphire originated as
the Fuchsia operating system's Bluetooth stack and is used in production. The
Sapphire Host stack has been migrated into the Pigweed project for use in
embedded projects. However, as it was not written in an embedded context, there
is a lot of work to be done to optimize memory usage.

Why use Sapphire?

* **Open source**, unlike vendor Bluetooth stacks. This makes debugging and
  fixing issues much easier!
* **Integrated with Pigweed**. Logs, asserts, randomness, time, async, strings,
  and more are all using Pigweed modules.
* **Excellent test coverage**, unlike most Bluetooth stacks. This means fewer
  bugs and greater maintainability.
* **Certified**. Sapphire was certified by the Bluetooth SIG after passing
  all conformance tests.
* **A great API**. Coming 2024. See :ref:`module-pw_bluetooth`.

---------------
Fuchsia support
---------------
``//pw_bluetooth_sapphire/fuchsia`` currently contains stub boilerplate to
demonstrate building, running, and testing Fuchsia components and packages with
the Fuchsia SDK.

It will eventually be replaced by the `bt-host component`_ once that's migrated.

Build the package
=================
To build the example stub package, use the following command:

.. code-block::

   bazel build //pw_bluetooth_sapphire/fuchsia/hello_world:pkg

Run the component
=================
To run the example stub component, use the following command:

.. code-block::

   bazel run //pw_bluetooth_sapphire/fuchsia/hello_world:pkg.component

-------
Roadmap
-------
* Support Bazel (In Progress)
* Support CMake
* Implement :ref:`module-pw_bluetooth` APIs
* Optimize memory footprint
* Add snoop log capture support
* Add metrics
* Add configuration options (LE only, Classic only, etc.)
* Add CLI for controlling stack over RPC

.. _bt-host component: https://fuchsia.googlesource.com/fuchsia/+/refs/heads/main/src/connectivity/bluetooth/core/bt-host/
