pw_bluetooth/docs.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_bluetooth:

================
pw_bluetooth
================
The ``pw_bluetooth`` module contains APIs and utilities for the host layer of
Bluetooth Low Energy.

--------
Host API
--------
.. attention::

   This module is still under construction, the API is not yet stable.

The headers in `public/pw_bluetooth` constitute a Bluetooth Host API. `host.h`
is the entry point from which all other APIs are exposed. Currently, only Low
Energy APIs exist.

Host
====
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::Host
   :members:

low_energy::Central
===================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::Central
   :members:

low_energy::Peripheral
======================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::Peripheral
   :members:

low_energy::AdvertisedPeripheral
================================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::AdvertisedPeripheral
   :members:

low_energy::Connection
======================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::Connection
   :members:

low_energy::ConnectionOptions
=============================
.. doxygenstruct:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::ConnectionOptions
   :members:

low_energy::RequestedConnectionParameters
=========================================
.. doxygenstruct:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::RequestedConnectionParameters
   :members:

low_energy::ConnectionParameters
================================
.. doxygenstruct:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::ConnectionParameters
   :members:

gatt::Server
============
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::Server
   :members:

gatt::LocalServiceInfo
======================
.. doxygenstruct:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::LocalServiceInfo
   :members:

gatt::LocalService
==================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::LocalService
   :members:

gatt::LocalServiceDelegate
==========================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::LocalServiceDelegate
   :members:

gatt::Client
============
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::Client
   :members:

gatt::RemoteService
===================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::RemoteService
   :members:

Callbacks
=========
This module contains callback-heavy APIs. Callbacks must not call back into the
``pw_bluetooth`` APIs unless otherwise noted. This includes calls made by
destroying objects returned by the API. Additionally, callbacks must not block.

-------------------------
Emboss Packet Definitions
-------------------------
``pw_bluetooth`` contains `Emboss <https://github.com/google/emboss>`_ packet
definitions. So far, packets from the following protocols are defined:

- HCI
- L2CAP

Usage
=====

.. tab-set::

   .. tab-item:: GN
      :sync: gn

      1. Set the `dir_pw_third_party_emboss` GN variable to the path of your
      Emboss checkout.

      2. Add `$dir_pw_bluetooth/emboss_hci` (for HCI packets) or
      `$dir_pw_bluetooth/emboss_vendor` (for vendor packets) to your dependency
      list.

   .. tab-item:: Bazel
      :sync: bazel

      1. Add Emboss to your Bazel workspace as `@com_google_emboss`.

      2. Add `@pigweed//pw_bluetooth:emboss_hci` to your deps.


3. Include the generated header files.

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "pw_bluetooth/hci_commands.emb.h"
   #include "pw_bluetooth/hci_test.emb.h"
   #include "pw_bluetooth/hci_vendor.emb.h"

4. Construct an Emboss view over a buffer.

.. code-block:: cpp

   std::array<uint8_t, 4> buffer = {0x00, 0x01, 0x02, 0x03};
   auto view = pw::bluetooth::emboss::MakeTestCommandPacketView(&buffer);
   EXPECT_EQ(view.payload().Read(), 0x03);

.. note::

   clangd will complain that the generated header file does not exist.
   You need to build your project to resolve this. Similarly, you need to build
   in order for .emb file updates to be reflected in the generated headers.

Size Report
===========
Delta of +972 when constructing the first packet view and reading/writing a
field. This includes the runtime library and the 4-byte buffer.

.. include:: emboss_size_report

Delta of +96 when adding a second packet view and reading/writing a field.

.. include:: emboss_size_report_diff

-------
Roadmap
-------
- Create a backend for the Bluetooth API using Fuchsia's Bluetooth stack
  (sapphire).
- Stabilize the Bluetooth API.
- Add BR/EDR APIs.
- Bazel support
- CMake support

Commit message:

pw_bluetooth: Add emboss contributing section to docs.rst
Includes:
- Run format on emboss files to get them to standard format.
- Update Roadmap a bit

Bug: b/331195584
Change-Id: I683dea48c7826dfc9e4b9d1aa643de344d449f78
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/199531
Pigweed-Auto-Submit: David Rees <drees@google.com>
Reviewed-by: Faraaz Sareshwala <fsareshwala@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Auto-Submit <auto-submit@pigweed-service-accounts.iam.gserviceaccount.com>
Presubmit-Verified: CQ Bot Account <pigweed-scoped@luci-project-accounts.iam.gserviceaccount.com>

pw_bluetooth/docs.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_bluetooth:

================
pw_bluetooth
================
The ``pw_bluetooth`` module contains APIs and utilities for the host layer of
Bluetooth Low Energy.

--------
Host API
--------
.. attention::

   This module is still under construction, the API is not yet stable.

The headers in `public/pw_bluetooth` constitute a Bluetooth Host API. `host.h`
is the entry point from which all other APIs are exposed. Currently, only Low
Energy APIs exist.

Host
====
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::Host
   :members:

low_energy::Central
===================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::Central
   :members:

low_energy::Peripheral
======================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::Peripheral
   :members:

low_energy::AdvertisedPeripheral
================================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::AdvertisedPeripheral
   :members:

low_energy::Connection
======================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::Connection
   :members:

low_energy::ConnectionOptions
=============================
.. doxygenstruct:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::ConnectionOptions
   :members:

low_energy::RequestedConnectionParameters
=========================================
.. doxygenstruct:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::RequestedConnectionParameters
   :members:

low_energy::ConnectionParameters
================================
.. doxygenstruct:: pw::bluetooth::low_energy::ConnectionParameters
   :members:

gatt::Server
============
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::Server
   :members:

gatt::LocalServiceInfo
======================
.. doxygenstruct:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::LocalServiceInfo
   :members:

gatt::LocalService
==================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::LocalService
   :members:

gatt::LocalServiceDelegate
==========================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::LocalServiceDelegate
   :members:

gatt::Client
============
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::Client
   :members:

gatt::RemoteService
===================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::bluetooth::gatt::RemoteService
   :members:

Callbacks
=========
This module contains callback-heavy APIs. Callbacks must not call back into the
``pw_bluetooth`` APIs unless otherwise noted. This includes calls made by
destroying objects returned by the API. Additionally, callbacks must not block.

-------------------------
Emboss Packet Definitions
-------------------------
``pw_bluetooth`` contains `Emboss <https://github.com/google/emboss>`_ packet
definitions. So far, some packets and enums from the following protocols are
defined:

- HCI
- L2CAP
- H4

Usage
=====

.. tab-set::

   .. tab-item:: GN
      :sync: gn

      1. Set the `dir_pw_third_party_emboss` GN variable to the path of your
      Emboss checkout.

      2. Add `$dir_pw_bluetooth/emboss_hci` (for HCI packets) or
      `$dir_pw_bluetooth/emboss_vendor` (for vendor packets) to your dependency
      list.

   .. tab-item:: Bazel
      :sync: bazel

      1. Add Emboss to your Bazel workspace as `@com_google_emboss`.

      2. Add `@pigweed//pw_bluetooth:emboss_hci` to your deps.


3. Include the generated header files.

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "pw_bluetooth/hci_commands.emb.h"
   #include "pw_bluetooth/hci_test.emb.h"
   #include "pw_bluetooth/hci_vendor.emb.h"

4. Construct an Emboss view over a buffer.

.. code-block:: cpp

   std::array<uint8_t, 4> buffer = {0x00, 0x01, 0x02, 0x03};
   auto view = pw::bluetooth::emboss::MakeTestCommandPacketView(&buffer);
   EXPECT_EQ(view.payload().Read(), 0x03);

.. note::

   clangd will complain that the generated header file does not exist.
   You need to build your project to resolve this. Similarly, you need to build
   in order for .emb file updates to be reflected in the generated headers.


Contributing
============
Emboss `.emb` files can be edited to add additional packets and enums.

Emboss files should be formatted by running the following from the Pigweed root.

.. code-block::

   (export EMBOSS_PATH=/ssd2/dev2/pigweed/environment/packages/emboss &&
       export "PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:$EMBOSS_PATH" &&
       python3 $EMBOSS_PATH/compiler/front_end/format.py pw_bluetooth/public/pw_bluetooth/*.emb)

If adding files note GN, Bazel, and CMake build rules all need to be updated.
Presubmit will run tests on all three.


Size Report
===========
Delta of +972 when constructing the first packet view and reading/writing a
field. This includes the runtime library and the 4-byte buffer.

.. include:: emboss_size_report

Delta of +96 when adding a second packet view and reading/writing a field.

.. include:: emboss_size_report_diff

-------
Roadmap
-------
- Bluetooth Proxy (WIP in in :ref:`module-pw_bluetooth_proxy`)
- Add automated emboss file formatting to `pw format` (`b/331195584 <https://pwbug.dev/331195584>`_)
- Create a backend for the Bluetooth API using Fuchsia's Bluetooth stack
  (Sapphire).
- Stabilize the Bluetooth API.
- Add BR/EDR APIs.
