pw_rust/docs.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_rust:

=======
pw_rust
=======
Rust support in pigweed is **highly** experimental.  Currently functionality
is split between Bazel and GN support.

-----
Bazel
-----
Bazel support is based on `rules_rust <https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_rust>`_
and supports a rich set of targets for both host and target builds.

Building and Running the Embedded Example
=========================================
The ``embedded_hello`` example can be built for both the ``lm3s6965evb``
and ``microbit`` QEMU machines.  The example can be built and run using
the following commands where ``PLATFORM`` is one of ``lm3s6965evb`` or
``microbit``.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ bazel build //pw_rust/examples/embedded_hello:hello \
     --platforms //pw_build/platforms:${PLATFORM}

   $ qemu-system-arm \
     -machine ${PLATFORM} \
     -nographic \
     -semihosting-config enable=on,target=native \
     -kernel ./bazel-bin/pw_rust/examples/embedded_hello/hello
   Hello, Pigweed!

--
GN
--
In GN, currently only building a single host binary using the standard
libraries is supported.  Windows builds are currently unsupported.

Building
========
To build the sample rust targets, you need to enable
``pw_rust_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_BUILD``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ gn gen out --args="pw_rust_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_BUILD=true"

Once that is set, you can build and run the ``hello`` example:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ ninja -C out host_clang_debug/obj/pw_rust/example/bin/hello
   $ ./out/host_clang_debug/obj/pw_rust/examples/host_executable/bin/hello
   Hello, Pigweed!

------------------
Third Party Crates
------------------
Thrid party crates are vendored in the
`third_party/rust_crates <https://pigweed.googlesource.com/third_party/rust_crates>`_
respository.  Currently referencing these is only supported through the bazel
build.

Commit message:

pw_rust: Add Rust tokenized logging example
Change-Id: I9249bcfc1da5870d664add5a57251b2d2e1c90a5
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/181268
Reviewed-by: Taylor Cramer <cramertj@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Auto-Submit <auto-submit@pigweed-service-accounts.iam.gserviceaccount.com>
Presubmit-Verified: CQ Bot Account <pigweed-scoped@luci-project-accounts.iam.gserviceaccount.com>
Pigweed-Auto-Submit: Erik Gilling <konkers@google.com>

pw_rust/docs.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_rust:

=======
pw_rust
=======
Rust support in pigweed is **highly** experimental.  Currently functionality
is split between Bazel and GN support.

-----
Bazel
-----
Bazel support is based on `rules_rust <https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_rust>`_
and supports a rich set of targets for both host and target builds.

Building and Running the Embedded Examples
==========================================
The examples can be built for both the ``lm3s6965evb`` and ``microbit``
QEMU machines.  The example can be built and run using the following commands
where ``PLATFORM`` is one of ``lm3s6965evb`` or ``microbit``.

embedded_hello
--------------
.. code-block:: bash

   $ bazel build //pw_rust/examples/embedded_hello:hello \
     --platforms //pw_build/platforms:${PLATFORM}

   $ qemu-system-arm \
     -machine ${PLATFORM} \
     -nographic \
     -semihosting-config enable=on,target=native \
     -kernel ./bazel-bin/pw_rust/examples/embedded_hello/hello
   Hello, Pigweed!


tokenized_logging
-----------------
.. code-block:: bash

   $ bazel build //pw_rust/examples/tokenized_logging:tokenized_logging \
     --//pw_log/rust:pw_log_backend=//pw_rust/examples/tokenized_logging:pw_log_backend\
     --platforms //pw_build/platforms:${PLATFORM}

   $ qemu-system-arm \
     -machine ${PLATFORM} \
     -nographic \
     -semihosting-config enable=on,target=native \
     -kernel ./bazel-bin/pw_rust/examples/tokenized_logging/tokenized_logging \
     | python -m pw_tokenizer.detokenize \
     base64 \
     ./bazel-bin/pw_rust/examples/tokenized_logging/tokenized_logging

--
GN
--
In GN, currently only building a single host binary using the standard
libraries is supported.  Windows builds are currently unsupported.

Building
========
To build the sample rust targets, you need to enable
``pw_rust_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_BUILD``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ gn gen out --args="pw_rust_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_BUILD=true"

Once that is set, you can build and run the ``hello`` example:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ ninja -C out host_clang_debug/obj/pw_rust/example/bin/hello
   $ ./out/host_clang_debug/obj/pw_rust/examples/host_executable/bin/hello
   Hello, Pigweed!

------------------
Third Party Crates
------------------
Thrid party crates are vendored in the
`third_party/rust_crates <https://pigweed.googlesource.com/third_party/rust_crates>`_
respository.  Currently referencing these is only supported through the bazel
build.
