pw_allocator/api.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api:

=============
API reference
=============
.. pigweed-module-subpage::
   :name: pw_allocator

This module provides the following:

- Generic allocator interfaces that can be injected into routines that need
  dynamic memory. These include :ref:`module-pw_allocator-api-allocator`, as
  well as the :ref:`module-pw_allocator-api-layout` type that is passed to it
  and the :ref:`module-pw_allocator-api-unique_ptr` returned from it.
- Concrete allocator implementations used to provide memory dynamically.
- "Forwarding" allocators, as described by
  :ref:`module-pw_allocator-design-forwarding`.
- Additional allocator utility classes. These are typically used by allocator
  implementers.
- Test utilities for testing allocator implementations. These are typically used
  by allocator implementers.

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-allocator:

------------------------
pw::allocator::Allocator
------------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::Allocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-layout:

Layout
======
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::Layout
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-unique_ptr:

UniquePtr
=========
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::UniquePtr
   :members:

-------------------------
Allocator Implementations
-------------------------
This module provides several concrete allocator implementations of the
:ref:`module-pw_allocator-api-allocator` interface:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-block_allocator:

BlockAllocator
==============
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::internal::BlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-first_fit_block_allocator:

FirstFitBlockAllocator
----------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::FirstFitBlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-last_fit_block_allocator:

LastFitBlockAllocator
---------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::LastFitBlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-best_fit_block_allocator:

BestFitBlockAllocator
---------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::BestFitBlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-worst_fit_block_allocator:

WorstFitBlockAllocator
----------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::WorstFitBlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-dual_first_fit_block_allocator:

DualFirstFitBlockAllocator
--------------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::DualFirstFitBlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-libc_allocator:

LibCAllocator
=============
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::LibCAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-null_allocator:

NullAllocator
=============
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::NullAllocator
   :members:

.. TODO: b/328076428 - Update FreeListHeap or remove

---------------------
Forwarding Allocators
---------------------
This module provides several "forwarding" allocators, as described in
:ref:`module-pw_allocator-design-forwarding`.

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-fallback_allocator:

FallbackAllocator
=================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::FallbackAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-synchronized_allocator:

SynchronizedAllocator
=====================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::SynchronizedAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-tracking_allocator:

TrackingAllocator
=================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::TrackingAllocatorImpl
   :members:

---------------
Utility Classes
---------------
In addition to providing allocator implementations themselves, this module
includes some utility classes.

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-block:

Block
=====
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::Block
   :members:

.. tip::
   Avoid converting pointers to allocations into ``Block`` instances, even if
   you know your memory is coming from a ``BlockAllocator``. Breaking the
   abstraction in this manner will limit your flexibility to change to a
   different allocator in the future.

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-metrics_adapter:

Metrics
=======
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::internal::Metrics
   :members:

This class is templated on a ``MetricsType`` struct. See
:ref:`module-pw_allocator-design-metrics` for additional details on how the
struct, this class, and :ref:`module-pw_allocator-api-tracking_allocator`
interact.

This modules also includes two concrete metrics types that can be used as the
template parameter of this class:

- ``AllMetrics``, which enables all metrics.
- ``NoMetrics``, which disables all metrics.

Additionally, module consumers can define their own metrics structs using the
following macros:

.. doxygendefine:: PW_ALLOCATOR_METRICS_DECLARE
.. doxygendefine:: PW_ALLOCATOR_METRICS_ENABLE

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-size_reporter:

SizeReporter
============
This modules includes a utility class for generating size reports. It is
intended for allocator implementers and not for module consumers.

.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::SizeReporter
   :members:

Buffer management
=================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::WithBuffer
   :members:

The following utility functions are available to allocator implementers. They
are not intended to be used by module consumers.

.. doxygenfunction:: pw::allocator::GetAlignedSubspan
.. doxygenfunction:: pw::allocator::IsWithin

------------
Test support
------------
This modules includes test utilities for allocator implementers. These
facilitate writing unit tests and fuzz tests for both concrete and forwarding
allocator implementations. They are not intended to be used by module consumers.

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-allocator_for_test:

AllocatorForTest
================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::test::AllocatorForTest
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-allocator_test_harness:

AllocatorTestHarness
====================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::test::AllocatorTestHarness
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-fuzzing_support:

FuzzTest support
================
.. doxygenfunction:: pw::allocator::test::ArbitraryAllocatorRequest
.. doxygenfunction:: pw::allocator::test::ArbitraryAllocatorRequests
.. doxygenfunction:: pw::allocator::test::MakeAllocatorRequest

Commit message:

pw_allocator: Add Capabilities
This CL adds the ability for derived allocators to provide a set of
capabilities, to the base allocator class. This allows both the base
class and forwarding allocators to inquire about optional methods
implemented or optional behaviors desired.

Currently, this is only used to enforce that the primary allocator for a
`FallbackAllocator` can `Query`. In subsequent CLs, it will also be used
to determine how `TrackingAllocator` should store allocation details,
and allow `BumpAllocator` to skip destroying objects in `Delete`.

Change-Id: Ia1a7069fe839126e40eb943e599d84a9ad437567
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/197133
Reviewed-by: Taylor Cramer <cramertj@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Aaron Green <aarongreen@google.com>

pw_allocator/api.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api:

=============
API reference
=============
.. pigweed-module-subpage::
   :name: pw_allocator

This module provides the following:

- Generic allocator interfaces that can be injected into routines that need
  dynamic memory. These include :ref:`module-pw_allocator-api-allocator`, as
  well as the :ref:`module-pw_allocator-api-layout` type that is passed to it
  and the :ref:`module-pw_allocator-api-unique_ptr` returned from it.
- Concrete allocator implementations used to provide memory dynamically.
- "Forwarding" allocators, as described by
  :ref:`module-pw_allocator-design-forwarding`.
- Additional allocator utility classes. These are typically used by allocator
  implementers.
- Test utilities for testing allocator implementations. These are typically used
  by allocator implementers.

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-allocator:

------------------------
pw::allocator::Allocator
------------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::Allocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-layout:

Layout
======
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::Layout
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-unique_ptr:

UniquePtr
=========
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::UniquePtr
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-capabilities:

Capabilities
============
This modules includes types for communicating about optional methods and
behaviors. It is intended for allocator implementers and not for module
consumers.

.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::Capabilities
   :members:

-------------------------
Allocator Implementations
-------------------------
This module provides several concrete allocator implementations of the
:ref:`module-pw_allocator-api-allocator` interface:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-block_allocator:

BlockAllocator
==============
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::internal::BlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-first_fit_block_allocator:

FirstFitBlockAllocator
----------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::FirstFitBlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-last_fit_block_allocator:

LastFitBlockAllocator
---------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::LastFitBlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-best_fit_block_allocator:

BestFitBlockAllocator
---------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::BestFitBlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-worst_fit_block_allocator:

WorstFitBlockAllocator
----------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::WorstFitBlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-dual_first_fit_block_allocator:

DualFirstFitBlockAllocator
--------------------------
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::DualFirstFitBlockAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-libc_allocator:

LibCAllocator
=============
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::LibCAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-null_allocator:

NullAllocator
=============
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::NullAllocator
   :members:

.. TODO: b/328076428 - Update FreeListHeap or remove

---------------------
Forwarding Allocators
---------------------
This module provides several "forwarding" allocators, as described in
:ref:`module-pw_allocator-design-forwarding`.

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-fallback_allocator:

FallbackAllocator
=================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::FallbackAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-synchronized_allocator:

SynchronizedAllocator
=====================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::SynchronizedAllocator
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-tracking_allocator:

TrackingAllocator
=================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::TrackingAllocatorImpl
   :members:

---------------
Utility Classes
---------------
In addition to providing allocator implementations themselves, this module
includes some utility classes.

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-block:

Block
=====
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::Block
   :members:

.. tip::
   Avoid converting pointers to allocations into ``Block`` instances, even if
   you know your memory is coming from a ``BlockAllocator``. Breaking the
   abstraction in this manner will limit your flexibility to change to a
   different allocator in the future.

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-metrics_adapter:

Metrics
=======
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::internal::Metrics
   :members:

This class is templated on a ``MetricsType`` struct. See
:ref:`module-pw_allocator-design-metrics` for additional details on how the
struct, this class, and :ref:`module-pw_allocator-api-tracking_allocator`
interact.

This modules also includes two concrete metrics types that can be used as the
template parameter of this class:

- ``AllMetrics``, which enables all metrics.
- ``NoMetrics``, which disables all metrics.

Additionally, module consumers can define their own metrics structs using the
following macros:

.. doxygendefine:: PW_ALLOCATOR_METRICS_DECLARE
.. doxygendefine:: PW_ALLOCATOR_METRICS_ENABLE

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-size_reporter:

SizeReporter
============
This modules includes a utility class for generating size reports. It is
intended for allocator implementers and not for module consumers.

.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::SizeReporter
   :members:

Buffer management
=================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::WithBuffer
   :members:

The following utility functions are available to allocator implementers. They
are not intended to be used by module consumers.

.. doxygenfunction:: pw::allocator::GetAlignedSubspan
.. doxygenfunction:: pw::allocator::IsWithin

------------
Test support
------------
This modules includes test utilities for allocator implementers. These
facilitate writing unit tests and fuzz tests for both concrete and forwarding
allocator implementations. They are not intended to be used by module consumers.

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-allocator_for_test:

AllocatorForTest
================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::test::AllocatorForTest
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-allocator_test_harness:

AllocatorTestHarness
====================
.. doxygenclass:: pw::allocator::test::AllocatorTestHarness
   :members:

.. _module-pw_allocator-api-fuzzing_support:

FuzzTest support
================
.. doxygenfunction:: pw::allocator::test::ArbitraryAllocatorRequest
.. doxygenfunction:: pw::allocator::test::ArbitraryAllocatorRequests
.. doxygenfunction:: pw::allocator::test::MakeAllocatorRequest
