pw_allocator/code_size.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_allocator-size-reports:

==================
Code size analysis
==================
.. pigweed-module-subpage::
   :name: pw_allocator
   :tagline: "pw_allocator: Flexible, safe, and measurable memory allocation"

----------------------------------------------------
Size comparision: concrete allocator implementations
----------------------------------------------------
``pw_allocator`` provides some implementations of the
``pw::allocator::Allocator`` interface. The relative code size costs for these
implementations are shown below:

.. include:: allocator_size_report

.. TODO: b/328076428 - change to "allocator_implementations_size_report"

-------------------------------------------------------
Size comparision: forwarding allocators implementations
-------------------------------------------------------
``pw_allocator`` also provides some "forwarding" allocators that wrap other
allocators to provides additional capabilities. The relative code size costs for
these wrappers are shown below:

.. TODO: b/328076428 - include "forwarding_allocators_size_report"

Commit message:

pw_allocator: Refactor code size reports
This CL adds a new utility, SizeReporter, and uses it to generate a
number of new code size reports for the various concrete and forwarding
allocators, as well as for allocator utilities such as UniquePtr.

Change-Id: I41ba481633330ebb911b9fd1589a743c7bd9a0ce
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/194947
Reviewed-by: Kayce Basques <kayce@google.com>
Reviewed-by: Alexei Frolov <frolv@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Aaron Green <aarongreen@google.com>

pw_allocator/code_size.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_allocator-size-reports:

==================
Code size analysis
==================
.. pigweed-module-subpage::
   :name: pw_allocator
   :tagline: "pw_allocator: Flexible, safe, and measurable memory allocation"

This module provides several implementations of the
:ref:`module-pw_allocator-api-allocator` interface. The tables below shows the
relative code size for each of these allocators' independent implementation of
the complete allocator interface. Your code size may be smaller if you use a
subset of the interface or if you use more than one allocator.

----------------------------------------------------
Size comparision: concrete allocator implementations
----------------------------------------------------
The following are code size for the provided allocator implementation that
directly manage the memory they use to fulfill requests:

.. include:: concrete_allocators_size_report

-------------------------------------------------------
Size comparision: forwarding allocators implementations
-------------------------------------------------------
The following are code size for the provided "forwarding" allocators as
described by :ref:`module-pw_allocator-design-forwarding`:

.. include:: forwarding_allocators_size_report
