pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib/docs.rst, before:

.. _module-pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib:

=====================
pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib
=====================
The ``pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib`` module provides an extremely limited
implementation of the C++ Standard Library. This module falls far, far short of
providing a complete C++ Standard Library and should only be used for testing
and development when compiling with C++17 or newer without a C++ Standard
Library. Production code should use a real C++ Standard Library implementation,
such as `libc++ <https://libcxx.llvm.org/>`_ or
`libstdc++ <https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/libstdc++/>`_.

.. warning::

  ``pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib`` was created for a very specific purpose. It is NOT a
  general purpose C++ Standard Library implementation and should not be used as
  one. Many features are missing, some features non-functioning stubs, and some
  features may not match the C++ standard.

-----------
Code layout
-----------
The C++ Standard Library headers (e.g. ``<cstdint>`` and ``<type_traits>``) are
defined in ``public/``. These files are symlinks to their implementations in
``public/internal/``.

.. tip::

  You can automatically recreate the symlinks in ``public/`` by executing the
  following Bash code from ``pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib/public/``.

  .. code-block:: bash

    for f in $(ls pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib/internal/); do ln -s pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib/internal/$f ${f%.h}; done

The top-level ``build_with_minimal_cpp_stdlib`` GN group builds a few supported
modules with ``pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib`` swapped in for the C++ library at the
toolchain level. Notably, ``pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib`` does not support
``pw_unit_test``, so this group does not run any tests.

------------
Requirements
------------
- C++17
- gcc or clang
- The C Standard Library

Commit message:

pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib: Update to compile with stdcompat
- stdcompat refers to a larger part of the standard library, so
  implement or stub out those parts as needed.
- Temporarily fix standard library includes in stdcompat locally. This
  will be fixed upstream and rolled into Pigweed.
- Mark unimplemented features as "deprecated" so using them results in a
  compiler warning.
- Add building with pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib to the presubmit.
- Update the docs to be clearer about the limitations of
  pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib.

Fixes: b/302175933
Change-Id: I99ab7f0212fe7fec569c641b3f6be6e5b6dd78c2
Reviewed-on: https://pigweed-review.googlesource.com/c/pigweed/pigweed/+/173350
Pigweed-Auto-Submit: Wyatt Hepler <hepler@google.com>
Reviewed-by: Alexei Frolov <frolv@google.com>
Commit-Queue: Wyatt Hepler <hepler@google.com>

pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib/docs.rst, after:

.. _module-pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib:

=====================
pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib
=====================
.. admonition:: 🛑 Stop 🛑

   **Do not use this module** unless you have consulted with the Pigweed team.

The ``pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib`` module provides an extremely limited, incomplete
implementation of the C++ Standard Library. This module is only intended for
testing and development when compiling with C++17 or newer, but without access
to the C++ Standard Library (``-nostdinc++``).

Production code should use a real C++ Standard Library implementation, such as
`libc++ <https://libcxx.llvm.org/>`_ or `libstdc++
<https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/libstdc++/>`_.

.. warning::

  ``pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib`` was created for a very specific purpose. It is NOT a
  general purpose C++ Standard Library implementation and should not be used as
  one.

  - Many library features are **missing**.
  - Many features are **non-functioning stubs**.
  - Some features **do not match the C++ standard**.
  - Test coverage is **extremely limited**.

-----------------
Build integration
-----------------
The top-level ``build_with_minimal_cpp_stdlib`` GN group builds a few supported
modules with ``pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib`` swapped in for the C++ library at the
toolchain level. Notably, ``pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib`` does not support
``pw_unit_test``, so this group does NOT run any tests.

-----------
Code layout
-----------
The C++ Standard Library headers (e.g. ``<cstdint>`` and ``<type_traits>``) are
defined in ``public/``. These files are symlinks to their implementations in
``public/internal/``.

.. tip::

  You can automatically recreate the symlinks in ``public/`` by executing the
  following Bash code from ``pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib/public/``.

  .. code-block:: bash

    for f in $(ls pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib/internal/); do ln -s pw_minimal_cpp_stdlib/internal/$f ${f%.h}; done

------------
Requirements
------------
- C++17
- gcc or clang
- The C Standard Library
